<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!--
The Project Gutenberg EBook of An Elementary Course in Synthetic
Projective Geometry by Lehmer, Derrick Norman



This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license



Title: An Elementary Course in Synthetic Projective Geometry

Author: Lehmer, Derrick Norman

Release Date: November 4, 2005 [Ebook #17001]

Language: American

Character set encoding: UTF-8
-->

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd">

<TEI.2 lang="en-us">
<teiHeader>
   <fileDesc>
  <titleStmt>
   <title>An Elementary Course in Synthetic Projective Geometry</title>
   <author>Lehmer, Derrick Norman</author>
  </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
  <publicationStmt>
 <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
 <date value="2005-11-4">November 4, 2005</date>
 <idno type="etext-no">17001</idno>
 <idno type="DPid">projectID3fa113afbb55e</idno>
 <availability>
   <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
   with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
   away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
   License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
 </availability>
  </publicationStmt>

    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        <title>An Elementary Course in Synthetic Projective Geometry</title>
        <author>Lehmer, Derrick Norman</author>
        <imprint>
          <pubPlace>Boston</pubPlace>
          <publisher>Ginn and Company</publisher>
          <date>1917</date>
        </imprint>
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>

  <encodingDesc>
    <classDecl>
      <taxonomy id="lc">
        <bibl>
	  <title>Library of Congress Classification</title>
	</bibl>
      </taxonomy>
    </classDecl>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en-us">United States English</language>
    </langUsage>
    <textClass>
      <classCode scheme="lc">
        *** <!-- LoC Class (PR, PQ, ...) -->
      </classCode>
      <keywords>
        <list>
	  <!-- <item></item> any keywords for PG search engine -->
	</list>
      </keywords>
    </textClass>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2005-11">November 2005</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>Joshua Hutchinson, </name>
        <name>Cornell University, </name>
        <name>Online Distributed Proofreading Team</name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg Edition</item>
    </change>
    <change>
      <date value="2006-6">June 2006</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>Joshua Hutchinson</name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Added PGHeader/PGFooter.</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    figure           { text-align: center; page-float: 'htb' }
    .w95             { }
    @media pdf {
      .w95             { width: 95% }
      }
  </pgStyleSheet>
</pgExtensions>

<text>
<front>

<div>
<divGen type="pgheader" />
</div>

<div>
<divGen type="encodingDesc" />
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<divGen type="titlepage" />
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="iii" /><anchor id="Pgiii" />
<head>Preface</head>

<p>The following course is intended to give, in as simple
a way as possible, the essentials of synthetic projective
geometry. While, in the main, the theory is developed
along the well-beaten track laid out by the great masters
of the subject, it is believed that there has been a slight
smoothing of the road in some places. Especially will
this be observed in the chapter on Involution. The
author has never felt satisfied with the usual treatment
of that subject by means of circles and anharmonic
ratios. A purely projective notion ought not to be based
on metrical foundations. Metrical developments should
be made there, as elsewhere in the theory, by the
introduction of infinitely distant elements.</p>

<p>The author has departed from the century-old custom
of writing in parallel columns each theorem and its
dual. He has not found that it conduces to sharpness
of vision to try to focus his eyes on two things at once.
Those who prefer the usual method of procedure can,
of course, develop the two sets of theorems side by side;
the author has not found this the better plan in actual
teaching.</p>

<p>As regards nomenclature, the author has followed
the lead of the earlier writers in English, and has called
the system of lines in a plane which all pass through a
point a <hi rend="font-style: italic">pencil of rays</hi> instead of a <hi rend="font-style: italic">bundle of rays</hi>, as later
writers seem inclined to do. For a point considered
<pb n="iv" /><anchor id="Pgiv" />
as made up of all the lines and planes through it he
has ventured to use the term <hi rend="font-style: italic">point system</hi>, as being
the natural dualization of the usual term <hi rend="font-style: italic">plane system</hi>.
He has also rejected the term <hi rend="font-style: italic">foci of an involution</hi>, and
has not used the customary terms for classifying involutions&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">hyperbolic
involution</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">elliptic involution</hi> and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">parabolic involution</hi>. He has found that all these terms
are very confusing to the student, who inevitably tries
to connect them in some way with the conic sections.</p>

<p>Enough examples have been provided to give the
student a clear grasp of the theory. Many are of sufficient
generality to serve as a basis for individual investigation
on the part of the student. Thus, the third
example at the end of the first chapter will be found
to be very fruitful in interesting results. A correspondence
is there indicated between lines in space and
circles through a fixed point in space. If the student
will trace a few of the consequences of that correspondence,
and determine what configurations of circles
correspond to intersecting lines, to lines in a plane, to
lines of a plane pencil, to lines cutting three skew lines,
etc., he will have acquired no little practice in picturing
to himself figures in space.</p>

<p>The writer has not followed the usual practice of
inserting historical notes at the foot of the page, and
has tried instead, in the last chapter, to give a consecutive
account of the history of pure geometry, or, at
least, of as much of it as the student will be able to
appreciate who has mastered the course as given in the
preceding chapters. One is not apt to get a very wide
view of the history of a subject by reading a hundred
<pb n="v" /><anchor id="Pgv" />
biographical footnotes, arranged in no sort of sequence.
The writer, moreover, feels that the proper time to
learn the history of a subject is after the student has
some general ideas of the subject itself.</p>

<p>The course is not intended to furnish an illustration
of how a subject may be developed, from the smallest
possible number of fundamental assumptions. The
author is aware of the importance of work of this sort,
but he does not believe it is possible at the present
time to write a book along such lines which shall be of
much use for elementary students. For the purposes of
this course the student should have a thorough grounding
in ordinary elementary geometry so far as to include
the study of the circle and of similar triangles. No solid
geometry is needed beyond the little used in the proof
of Desargues' theorem (25), and, except in certain
metrical developments of the general theory, there will
be no call for a knowledge of trigonometry or analytical
geometry. Naturally the student who is equipped with
these subjects as well as with the calculus will be a
little more mature, and may be expected to follow the
course all the more easily. The author has had no
difficulty, however, in presenting it to students in the
freshman class at the University of California.</p>

<p>The subject of synthetic projective geometry is, in
the opinion of the writer, destined shortly to force its
way down into the secondary schools; and if this little
book helps to accelerate the movement, he will feel
amply repaid for the task of working the materials into
a form available for such schools as well as for the
lower classes in the university.</p>

<pb n="vi" /><anchor id="Pgvi" />

<p>The material for the course has been drawn from
many sources. The author is chiefly indebted to the
classical works of Reye, Cremona, Steiner, Poncelet, and
Von Staudt. Acknowledgments and thanks are also
due to Professor Walter C. Eells, of the U.S. Naval
Academy at Annapolis, for his searching examination
and keen criticism of the manuscript; also to Professor
Herbert Ellsworth Slaught, of The University of Chicago,
for his many valuable suggestions, and to Professor
B. M. Woods and Dr. H. N. Wright, of the University
of California, who have tried out the methods of
presentation, in their own classes.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">D. N. LEHMER</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Berkeley, California</hi></p>

</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
      <index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
</div>

</front>

<body>
<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="1" /><anchor id="Pg1" />
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER I - ONE-TO-ONE CORRESPONDENCE</head>
<p></p>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="1. Definition of one-to-one correspondence" /><index index="pdf" />

<head></head><p><anchor id="p1" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">1. Definition of one-to-one correspondence.</hi>
Given any two sets of individuals, if it is possible to set up such
a correspondence between the two sets that to any
individual in one set corresponds one and only one
individual in the other, then the two sets are said to
be in <hi rend="font-style: italic">one-to-one correspondence</hi>  with each other. This
notion, simple as it is, is of fundamental importance
in all branches of science. The process of counting is
nothing but a setting up of a one-to-one correspondence
between the objects to be counted and certain
words, 'one,' 'two,' 'three,' etc., in the mind. Many
savage peoples have discovered no better method of
counting than by setting up a one-to-one correspondence
between the objects to be counted and their fingers.
The scientist who busies himself with naming and
classifying the objects of nature is only setting up a
one-to-one correspondence between the objects and certain
words which serve, not as a means of counting the
<pb n="2" /><anchor id="Pg2" />
objects, but of listing them in a convenient way. Thus
he may be able to marshal and array his material in
such a way as to bring to light relations that may
exist between the objects themselves. Indeed, the whole
notion of language springs from this idea of one-to-one
correspondence.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="2. Consequences of one-to-one correspondence" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p2" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">2. Consequences of one-to-one correspondence.</hi>
The most useful and interesting problem that may arise in
connection with any one-to-one correspondence is to
determine just what relations existing between the
individuals of one assemblage may be carried over to
another assemblage in one-to-one correspondence with
it. It is a favorite error to assume that whatever holds
for one set must also hold for the other. Magicians are
apt to assign magic properties to many of the words
and symbols which they are in the habit of using, and
scientists are constantly confusing objective things with
the subjective formulas for them. After the physicist
has set up correspondences between physical facts and
mathematical formulas, the "interpretation" of these
formulas is his most important and difficult task.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="3. Applications in mathematics" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p3" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">3.</hi>  In mathematics, effort is constantly being made
to set up one-to-one correspondences between simple
notions and more complicated ones, or between the well-explored
fields of research and fields less known. Thus,
by means of the mechanism employed in analytic geometry,
algebraic theorems are made to yield geometric
ones, and vice versa. In geometry we get at the properties
of the conic sections by means of the properties
of the straight line, and cubic surfaces are studied by
means of the plane.</p>

<pb n="3" /><anchor id="Pg3" />
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="4. One-to-one correspondence and enumeration" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image01.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 1</head>
<figDesc>Figure 1</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image02.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 2</head>
<figDesc>Figure 2</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p><anchor id="p4" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">4. One-to-one correspondence and enumeration.</hi> If a
one-to-one correspondence has been set up between the
objects of one set and the objects of another set, then
the inference may usually be drawn that they have the
same number of elements. If, however, there is an
infinite number of individuals in
each of the two sets, the notion
of counting is necessarily ruled
out. It may be possible, nevertheless,
to set up a one-to-one
correspondence between the elements
of two sets even when the
number is infinite. Thus, it is easy to set up such a
correspondence between the points of a line an inch
long and the points of a line two inches long. For let
the lines (Fig. 1) be <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'B'</hi>. Join <hi rend="font-style: italic">AA'</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">BB'</hi>,
and let these joining lines meet in <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>. For every point <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>
on <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi> a point <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi> may be found
on <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'B'</hi> by joining <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> to <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> and
noting the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi> where <hi rend="font-style: italic">CS</hi>
meets <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'B'</hi>. Similarly, a point <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>
may be found on <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi> for any
point <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi> on <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'B'</hi>. The correspondence
is clearly one-to-one,
but it would be absurd to infer
from this that there were just
as many points on <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi> as on <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'B'</hi>. In fact, it would
be just as reasonable to infer that there were twice as
many points on <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'B'</hi> as on <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi>. For if we bend <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'B'</hi>
into a circle with center at <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> (Fig. 2), we see that for
every point <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> on <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi> there are two points on <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'B'</hi>. Thus
<pb n="4" /><anchor id="Pg4" />
it is seen that the notion of one-to-one correspondence
is more extensive than the notion of counting, and
includes the notion of counting only when applied to
finite assemblages.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="5. Correspondence between a part and the whole" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p5" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">5. Correspondence between a part and the whole of an
infinite assemblage.</hi> In the discussion of the last paragraph
the remarkable fact was brought to light that it
is sometimes possible to set the elements of an assemblage
into one-to-one correspondence with a part of
those elements. A moment's reflection will convince
one that this is never possible when there is a finite
number of elements in the assemblage.&mdash;Indeed, we
may take this property as our definition of an infinite
assemblage, and say that an infinite assemblage is one
that may be put into one-to-one correspondence with
part of itself. This has the advantage of being a positive
definition, as opposed to the usual negative definition of
an infinite assemblage as one that cannot be counted.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="6. Infinitely distant point" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p6" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">6. Infinitely distant point.</hi>  We have illustrated above
a simple method of setting the points of two lines into
one-to-one correspondence. The same illustration will
serve also to show how it is possible to set the points
on a line into one-to-one correspondence with the lines
through a point. Thus, for any point <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> on the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi>
there is a line <hi rend="font-style: italic">SC</hi> through <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>. We must assume the line
<hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi> extended indefinitely in both directions, however, if
we are to have a point on it for every line through <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>;
and even with this extension there is one line through
<hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>, according to Euclid's postulate, which does not meet
the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi> and which therefore has no point on
<hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi> to correspond to it. In order to smooth out this
<pb n="5" /><anchor id="Pg5" />discrepancy we are accustomed to assume the existence
of an <hi rend="font-style: italic">infinitely distant</hi>  point on the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi> and to assign
this point as the corresponding point of the exceptional
line of <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>. With this understanding, then, we may say
that we have set the lines through a point and the
points on a line into one-to-one correspondence. This
correspondence is of such fundamental importance in
the study of projective geometry that a special name is
given to it. Calling the totality of points on a line a
<hi rend="font-style: italic">point-row</hi>, and the totality of lines through a point a
<hi rend="font-style: italic">pencil of rays</hi>, we say that the point-row and the pencil
related as above are in <hi rend="font-style: italic">perspective position</hi>, or that they
are <hi rend="font-style: italic">perspectively related</hi>.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="7. Axial pencil; fundamental forms" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p7" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">7. Axial pencil; fundamental forms.</hi>  A similar correspondence
may be set up between the points on a
line and the planes through another line which does not
meet the first. Such a system of planes is called an
<hi rend="font-style: italic">axial pencil</hi>, and the three assemblages&mdash;the point-row,
the pencil of rays, and the axial pencil&mdash;are called
<hi rend="font-style: italic">fundamental forms</hi>. The fact that they may all be set
into one-to-one correspondence with each other is expressed
by saying that they are of the same order. It is
usual also to speak of them as of the first order. We
shall see presently that there are other assemblages
which cannot be put into this sort of one-to-one correspondence
with the points on a line, and that they
will very reasonably be said to be of a higher order.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="8. Perspective position" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p8" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">8. Perspective position.</hi>  We have said that a point-row
and a pencil of rays are in perspective position if
each ray of the pencil goes through the point of the
point-row which corresponds to it. Two pencils of rays
<pb n="6" /><anchor id="Pg6" />
are also said to be in perspective position if corresponding
rays meet on a straight line which is called the
axis of perspectivity. Also, two point-rows are said to
be in perspective position if corresponding points lie on
straight lines through a point which is called the center
of perspectivity. A point-row and an axial pencil are
in perspective position if each plane of the pencil goes
through the point on the point-row which corresponds
to it, and an axial pencil and a pencil of rays are in
perspective position if each ray lies in the plane which
corresponds to it; and, finally, two axial pencils are
perspectively related if corresponding planes meet in
a plane.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="9. Projective relation" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p9" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">9. Projective relation.</hi>  It is easy to imagine a more
general correspondence between the points of two point-rows
than the one just described. If we take two
perspective pencils, <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>, then a point-row <hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi> perspective
to <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> will be in one-to-one correspondence with
a point-row <hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi> perspective to <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, but corresponding points
will not, in general, lie on lines which all pass through
a point. Two such point-rows are said to be <hi rend="font-style: italic">projectively
related</hi>, or simply projective to each other. Similarly,
two pencils of rays, or of planes, are projectively related
to each other if they are perspective to two perspective
point-rows. This idea will be generalized later on. It is
important to note that between the elements of two
projective fundamental forms there is a one-to-one correspondence,
and also that this correspondence is in
general <hi rend="font-style: italic">continuous</hi>; that is, by taking two elements of
one form sufficiently close to each other, the two corresponding
elements in the other form may be made to
<pb n="7" /><anchor id="Pg7" />
approach each other arbitrarily close. In the case of
point-rows this continuity is subject to exception in the
neighborhood of the point "at infinity."</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="10. Infinity-to-one correspondence" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p10" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">10. Infinity-to-one correspondence.</hi>  It might be inferred
that any infinite assemblage could be put into one-to-one
correspondence with any other. Such is not the case,
however, if the correspondence is to be continuous,
between the points on a line and the points on a plane.
Consider two lines which lie in different planes, and
take <hi rend="font-style: italic">m</hi> points on one and <hi rend="font-style: italic">n</hi> points on the other. The
number of lines joining the <hi rend="font-style: italic">m</hi> points of one to the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">n</hi> points jof the other is clearly <hi rend="font-style: italic">mn</hi>. If we symbolize
the totality of points on a line by [infinity], then a reasonable
symbol for the totality of lines drawn to cut two lines
would be [infinity]<hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi>. Clearly, for every point on one line there
are [infinity] lines cutting across the other, so that the correspondence
might be called [infinity]-to-one. Thus the assemblage
of lines cutting across two lines is of higher
order than the assemblage of points on a line; and as
we have called the point-row an assemblage of the first
order, the system of lines cutting across two lines ought
to be called of the second order.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="11. Infinitudes of different orders" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p11" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">11. Infinitudes of different orders.</hi>  Now it is easy to
set up a one-to-one correspondence between the points
in a plane and the system of lines cutting across two
lines which lie in different planes. In fact, each line of
the system of lines meets the plane in one point, and
each point in the plane determines one and only one line
cutting across the two given lines&mdash;namely, the line of
intersection of the two planes determined by the given
point with each of the given lines. The assemblage
<pb n="8" /><anchor id="Pg8" />
of points in the plane is thus of the same order as
that of the lines cutting across two lines which lie in
different planes, and ought therefore to be spoken of
as of the second order. We express all these results
as follows:</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="12. Points in a plane" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p12" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">12.</hi>  If the infinitude of points on a line is taken as
the infinitude of the first order, then the infinitude of
lines in a pencil of rays and the infinitude of planes in
an axial pencil are also of the first order, while the
infinitude of lines cutting across two "skew" lines, as
well as the infinitude of points in a plane, are of the
second order.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="13. Lines through a point" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p13" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">13.</hi>  If we join each of the points of a plane to a point
not in that plane, we set up a one-to-one correspondence
between the points in a plane and the lines through
a point in space. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Thus the infinitude of lines through a
point in space is of the second order.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="14. Planes through a point" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p14" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">14.</hi>  If to each line through a point in space we make
correspond that plane at right angles to it and passing
through the same point, we see that <hi rend="font-style: italic">the infinitude of
planes through a point in space is of the second order.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="15. Lines in a plane" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p15" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">15.</hi>  If to each plane through a point in space we
make correspond the line in which it intersects a given
plane, we see that <hi rend="font-style: italic">the infinitude of lines in a plane is of
the second order.</hi> This may also be seen by setting up
a one-to-one correspondence between the points on a
plane and the lines of that plane. Thus, take a point <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>
not in the plane. Join any point <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> of the plane to <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>.
Through <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> draw a plane at right angles to <hi rend="font-style: italic">MS</hi>. This
meets the given plane in a line <hi rend="font-style: italic">m</hi> which may be taken as
corresponding to the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>. Another very important
<pb n="9" /><anchor id="Pg9" />
method of setting up a one-to-one correspondence between
lines and points in a plane will be given later, and
many weighty consequences will be derived from it.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="16. Plane system and point system" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p16" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">16. Plane system and point system.</hi>  The plane, considered
as made up of the points and lines in it, is called
a <hi rend="font-style: italic">plane system</hi>  and is a fundamental form of the second
order. The point, considered as made up of all the lines
and planes passing through it, is called a <hi rend="font-style: italic">point system</hi>
and is also a fundamental form of the second order.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="17. Planes in space" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p17" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">17.</hi>  If now we take three lines in space all lying in
different planes, and select <hi rend="font-style: italic">l</hi> points on the first, <hi rend="font-style: italic">m</hi> points
on the second, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">n</hi> points on the third, then the total
number of planes passing through one of the selected
points on each line will be <hi rend="font-style: italic">lmn</hi>. It is reasonable, therefore,
to symbolize the totality of planes that are determined
by the [infinity] points on each of the three lines by
[infinity]<hi rend="vertical-align: super">3</hi>, and to call it an infinitude of the <hi rend="font-style: italic">third</hi>  order. But
it is easily seen that every plane in space is included in
this totality, so that <hi rend="font-style: italic">the totality of planes in space is an
infinitude of the third order.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="18. Points of space" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p18" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">18.</hi>  Consider now the planes perpendicular to these
three lines. Every set of three planes so drawn will
determine a point in space, and, conversely, through
every point in space may be drawn one and only one
set of three planes at right angles to the three given
lines. It follows, therefore, that <hi rend="font-style: italic">the totality of points
in space is an infinitude of the third order.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="19. Space system" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p19" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">19. Space system.</hi>  Space of three dimensions, considered
as made up of all its planes and points, is then
a fundamental form of the <hi rend="font-style: italic">third</hi>  order, which we shall
call a <hi rend="font-style: italic">space system.</hi></p>

<pb n="10" /><anchor id="Pg10" /></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="20. Lines in space" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p20" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">20. Lines in space.</hi>  If we join the twofold infinity
of points in one plane with the twofold infinity of
points in another plane, we get a totality of lines of
space which is of the fourth order of infinity. <hi rend="font-style: italic">The
totality of lines in space gives, then, a fundamental form
of the fourth order.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="21. Correspondence between points and numbers" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p21" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">21. Correspondence between points and numbers.</hi>  In
the theory of analytic geometry a one-to-one correspondence
is assumed to exist between points on a
line and numbers. In order to justify this assumption
a very extended definition of number must be made
use of. A one-to-one correspondence is then set up between
points in the plane and pairs of numbers, and
also between points in space and sets of three numbers.
A single constant will serve to define the position of
a point on a line; two, a point in the plane; three, a
point in space; etc. In the same theory a one-to-one
correspondence is set up between loci in the plane and
equations in two variables; between surfaces in space
and equations in three variables; etc. The equation of
a line in a plane involves two constants, either of which
may take an infinite number of values. From this it
follows that there is an infinity of lines in the plane
which is of the second order if the infinity of points on
a line is assumed to be of the first. In the same way
a circle is determined by three conditions; a sphere by
four; etc. We might then expect to be able to set up
a one-to-one correspondence between circles in a plane
and points, or planes in space, or between spheres and
lines in space. Such, indeed, is the case, and it is
often possible to infer theorems concerning spheres
<pb n="11" /><anchor id="Pg11" />
from theorems concerning lines, and vice versa. It is
possibilities such as these that, give to the theory of
one-to-one correspondence its great importance for the
mathematician. It must not be forgotten, however, that
we are considering only <hi rend="font-style: italic">continuous</hi>  correspondences. It
is perfectly possible to set, up a one-to-one correspondence
between the points of a line and the points of a
plane, or, indeed, between the points of a line and the
points of a space of any finite number of dimensions, if
the correspondence is not restricted to be continuous.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="22. Elements at infinity" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p22" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">22. Elements at infinity.</hi>  A final word is necessary
in order to explain a phrase which is in constant use in
the study of projective geometry. We have spoken of
the "point at infinity" on a straight line&mdash;a fictitious
point only used to bridge over the exceptional case
when we are setting up a one-to-one correspondence
between the points of a line and the lines through a
point. We speak of it as "a point" and not as "points,"
because in the geometry studied by Euclid we assume
only one line through a point parallel to a given line.
In the same sense we speak of all the points at infinity
in a plane as lying on a line, "the line at infinity,"
because the straight line is the simplest locus we can
imagine which has only one point in common with any
line in the plane. Likewise we speak of the "plane at
infinity," because that seems the most convenient way
of imagining the points at infinity in space. It must not
be inferred that these conceptions have any essential
connection with physical facts, or that other means of
picturing to ourselves the infinitely distant configurations
are not possible. In other branches of mathematics,
<pb n="12" /><anchor id="Pg12" />
notably in the theory of functions of a complex variable,
quite different assumptions are made and quite
different conceptions of the elements at infinity are used.
As we can know nothing experimentally about such
things, we are at liberty to make any assumptions we
please, so long as they are consistent and serve some
useful purpose.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<head>PROBLEMS</head>

<p>1. Since there is a threefold infinity of points in space,
there must be a sixfold infinity of pairs of points in space.
Each pair of points determines a line. Why, then, is there
not a sixfold infinity of lines in space?</p>

<p>2. If there is a fourfold infinity of lines in space, why
is it that there is not a fourfold infinity of planes through
a point, seeing that each line in space determines a plane
through that point?</p>

<p>3. Show that there is a fourfold infinity of circles in
space that pass through a fixed point. (Set up a one-to-one
correspondence between the axes of the circles and lines
in space.)</p>

<p>4. Find the order of infinity of all the lines of space
that cut across a given line; across two given lines; across
three given lines; across four given lines.</p>

<p>5. Find the order of infinity of all the spheres in space
that pass through a given point; through two given points;
through three given points; through four given points.</p>

<p>6. Find the order of infinity of all the circles on a
sphere; of all the circles on a sphere that pass through a
fixed point; through two fixed points; through three fixed
points; of all the circles in space; of all the circles that
cut across a given line.</p>

<pb n="13" /><anchor id="Pg13" />

<p>7. Find the order of infinity of all lines tangent to a
sphere; of all planes tangent to a sphere; of lines and
planes tangent to a sphere and passing through a fixed point.</p>

<p>8. Set up a one-to-one correspondence between the series
of numbers <hi rend="font-style: italic">1</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">2</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">3</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">4</hi>, ... and the series of even numbers
<hi rend="font-style: italic">2</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">4</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">6</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">8</hi> .... Are we justified in saying that there are just
as many even numbers as there are numbers altogether?</p>

<p>9. Is the axiom "The whole is greater than one of its
parts" applicable to infinite assemblages?</p>

<p>10. Make out a classified list of all the infinitudes of the
first, second, third, and fourth orders mentioned in this
chapter.</p>

</div>
</div>

<pb n="14" /><anchor id="Pg14" />
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER II - RELATIONS BETWEEN FUNDAMENTAL FORMS IN ONE-TO-ONE
CORRESPONDENCE WITH EACH OTHER</head>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="23. Seven fundamental forms" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p23" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">23. Seven fundamental forms.</hi>  In the preceding chapter
we have called attention to seven fundamental forms:
the point-row, the pencil of rays, the axial pencil, the
plane system, the point system, the space system, and
the system of lines in space. These fundamental forms
are the material which we intend to use in building up
a general theory which will be found to include ordinary
geometry as a special case. We shall be concerned, not
with measurement of angles and areas or line segments
as in the study of Euclid, but in combining and
comparing these fundamental forms and in "generating"
new forms by means of them. In problems of construction
we shall make no use of measurement, either
of angles or of segments, and except in certain special
applications of the general theory we shall not find it
necessary to require more of ourselves than the ability
to draw the line joining two points, or to find the point
of intersections of two lines, or the line of intersection
of two planes, or, in general, the common elements of
two fundamental forms.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="24. Projective properties" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p24" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">24. Projective properties.</hi>  Our chief interest in this
chapter will be the discovery of relations between
the elements of one form which hold between the
<pb n="15" /><anchor id="Pg15" />
corresponding elements of any other form in one-to-one
correspondence with it. We have already called attention
to the danger of assuming that whatever relations
hold between the elements of one assemblage must also
hold between the corresponding elements of any assemblage
in one-to-one correspondence with it. This false
assumption is the basis of the so-called "proof by
analogy" so much in vogue among speculative theorists.
When it appears that certain relations existing between
the points of a given point-row do not necessitate the
same relations between the corresponding elements of
another in one-to-one correspondence with it, we should
view with suspicion any application of the "proof by
analogy" in realms of thought where accurate judgments
are not so easily made. For example, if in a
given point-row <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> three points, <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, are taken
such that <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> is the middle point of the segment <hi rend="font-style: italic">AC</hi>,
it does not follow that the three points <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi>
in a point-row perspective to <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> will be so related.
Relations between the elements of any form which do
go over unaltered to the corresponding elements of
a form projectively related to it are called <hi rend="font-style: italic">projective
relations.</hi> Relations involving measurement of lines or
of angles are not projective.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="25. Desargues's theorem" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p25" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">25. Desargues's theorem.</hi>  We consider first the following
beautiful theorem, due to Desargues and called
by his name.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">If two triangles, <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi>, are so situated
that the lines <hi rend="font-style: italic">AA'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">BB'</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">CC'</hi> all meet in a point, then
the pairs of sides <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'B'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">BC</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'C'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">CA</hi> and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">C'A'</hi> all meet on a straight line, and conversely.</hi></p>

<pb n="16" /><anchor id="Pg16" />

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image03.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 3</head>
<figDesc>Figure 3</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>Let the lines <hi rend="font-style: italic">AA'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">BB'</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">CC'</hi> meet in the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>
(Fig. 3). Conceive of the figure as in space, so that
<hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> is the vertex of a trihedral angle of which the given
triangles are plane sections. The lines <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'B'</hi> are
in the same plane and must meet when produced, their
point of intersection
being clearly a point
in the plane of each
triangle and therefore
in the line of
intersection of these
two planes. Call this
point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>. By similar
reasoning the point
<hi rend="font-style: italic">Q</hi> of intersection of
the lines <hi rend="font-style: italic">BC</hi> and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">B'C'</hi> must lie on this same line as well as the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">R</hi>
of intersection of <hi rend="font-style: italic">CA</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'A'</hi>. Therefore the points
<hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Q</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">R</hi> all lie on the same line <hi rend="font-style: italic">m</hi>. If now we consider
the figure a plane figure, the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Q</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">R</hi>
still all lie on a straight line, which proves the theorem.
The converse is established in the same manner.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="26. Fundamental theorem concerning two complete
quadrangles" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p26" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">26. Fundamental theorem concerning two complete
quadrangles.</hi> This theorem throws into our hands the
following fundamental theorem concerning two complete
quadrangles, a <hi rend="font-style: italic">complete quadrangle</hi>  being defined
as the figure obtained by joining any four given points
by straight lines in the six possible ways.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Given two complete quadrangles, <hi rend="font-style: italic">K</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi> and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">K'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">L'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">M'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">N'</hi>, so related that <hi rend="font-style: italic">KL</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">K'L'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">MN</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">M'N'</hi> all
meet in a point <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>; <hi rend="font-style: italic">LM</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">L'M'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">NK</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">N'K'</hi> all meet in a
<pb n="17" /><anchor id="Pg17" />
point <hi rend="font-style: italic">Q</hi>; and <hi rend="font-style: italic">LN</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">L'N'</hi> meet in a point <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> on the line
<hi rend="font-style: italic">AC</hi>; then the lines <hi rend="font-style: italic">KM</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">K'M'</hi> also meet in a point <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>
on the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">AC</hi>.</hi></p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image04.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 4</head>
<figDesc>Figure 4</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>For, by the converse of the last theorem, <hi rend="font-style: italic">KK'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">LL'</hi>,
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">NN'</hi> all meet in a point <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> (Fig. 4). Also <hi rend="font-style: italic">LL'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">MM'</hi>,
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">NN'</hi> meet in a point, and therefore in the same
point <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>. Thus <hi rend="font-style: italic">KK'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">LL'</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">MM'</hi> meet in a point,
and so, by Desargues's theorem itself, <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> are
on a straight line.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="27. Importance of the theorem" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p27" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">27. Importance of the theorem.</hi>  The importance of
this theorem lies in the fact that, <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> being
given, an indefinite number of quadrangles <hi rend="font-style: italic">K'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">L'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">M'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">N'</hi>
my be found such that <hi rend="font-style: italic">K'L'</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">M'N'</hi> meet in <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">K'N'</hi>
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">L'M'</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, with <hi rend="font-style: italic">L'N'</hi> passing through <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>. Indeed,
the lines <hi rend="font-style: italic">AK'</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">AM'</hi> may be drawn arbitrarily
through <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, and any line through <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> may be used to
determine <hi rend="font-style: italic">L'</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">N'</hi>. By joining these two points to
<hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">K'</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">M'</hi> are determined. Then the line
<pb n="18" /><anchor id="Pg18" />
joining <hi rend="font-style: italic">K'</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">M'</hi>, found in this way, must pass
through the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> already determined by the quadrangle
<hi rend="font-style: italic">K</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi>. <hi rend="font-style: italic">The three points <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, given in
order, serve thus to determine a fourth point <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="28. Restatement of the theorem" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p28" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">28.</hi>  In a complete quadrangle the line joining any
two points is called the <hi rend="font-style: italic">opposite side</hi>  to the line joining
the other two points. The result of the preceding
paragraph may then be stated as follows:</p>

<p>Given three points, <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, in a straight line, if a
pair of opposite sides of a complete quadrangle pass
through <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, and another pair through <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, and one of the
remaining two sides goes through <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, then the other of
the remaining two sides will go through a fixed point
which does not depend on the quadrangle employed.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="29. Four harmonic points" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p29" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">29. Four harmonic points.</hi>  Four points, <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>,
related as in the preceding theorem are called <hi rend="font-style: italic">four
harmonic points</hi>. The point <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> is called the <hi rend="font-style: italic">fourth harmonic
of <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> with respect to <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi></hi>. Since <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> play
exactly the same rôle in the above construction, <hi rend="font-style: italic"><hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> is
also the fourth harmonic of <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> with respect to <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi></hi>.
<hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> are called <hi rend="font-style: italic">harmonic conjugates with respect to
<hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi></hi>. We proceed to show that <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> are also
harmonic conjugates with respect to <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>&mdash;that is,
that it is possible to find a quadrangle of which two
opposite sides shall pass through <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, two through <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>,
and of the remaining pair, one through <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and the other
through <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>.</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image05.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 5</head>
<figDesc>Figure 5</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>Let <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi> be the intersection of <hi rend="font-style: italic">KM</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">LN</hi> (Fig. 5).
Join <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi> to <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>. The joining lines cut out on the
sides of the quadrangle four points, <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Q</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">R</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>. Consider
the quadrangle <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">K</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Q</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi>. One pair of opposite sides
<pb n="19" /><anchor id="Pg19" />
passes through <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, one through <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, and one remaining side
through <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>; therefore the other remaining side must
pass through <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>. Similarly, <hi rend="font-style: italic">RS</hi> passes through <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">PS</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">QR</hi> pass
through <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>. The
quadrangle <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Q</hi>,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">R</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> therefore
has two opposite
sides through <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>,
two through <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>,
and the remaining
pair through
<hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>. <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> are thus harmonic conjugates with respect to <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>.
We may sum up the discussion, therefore, as follows:</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="30. Harmonic conjugates" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p30" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">30.</hi>  If <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> are harmonic conjugates with respect
to <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>, then <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> are harmonic conjugates with
respect to <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="31. Importance of the notion of four harmonic points" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p31" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">31. Importance of the notion.</hi>  The importance of the
notion of four harmonic points lies in the fact that it
is a relation which is carried over from four points in
a point-row <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> to the four points that correspond to
them in any point-row <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi> perspective to <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi>.</p>

<p>To prove this statement we construct a quadrangle
<hi rend="font-style: italic">K</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi> such that <hi rend="font-style: italic">KL</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">MN</hi> pass through <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">KN</hi>
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">LM</hi> through <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">LN</hi> through <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">KM</hi> through <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>.
Take now any point <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> not in the plane of the quadrangle
and construct the planes determined by <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> and
all the seven lines of the figure. Cut across this set of
planes by another plane not passing through <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>. This
plane cuts out on the set of seven planes another
<pb n="20" /><anchor id="Pg20" />
quadrangle which determines four new harmonic points,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D'</hi>, on the lines joining <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> to <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>. But
<hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> may be taken as any point, since the original quadrangle
may be taken in any plane through <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>;
and, further, the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D'</hi> are the intersection
of <hi rend="font-style: italic">SA</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">SB</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">SC</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">SD</hi> by any line. We have, then, the
remarkable theorem:</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="32. Projective invariance of four harmonic points" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p32" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">32.</hi>  <hi rend="font-style: italic">If any point is joined to four harmonic points, and
the four lines thus obtained are cut by any fifth, the four
points of intersection are again harmonic.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="33. Four harmonic lines" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p33" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">33. Four harmonic lines.</hi>  We are now able to extend
the notion of harmonic elements to pencils of rays, and
indeed to axial pencils. For if we define <hi rend="font-style: italic">four harmonic
rays</hi> as four rays which pass through a point and which
pass one through each of four harmonic points, we have
the theorem</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Four harmonic lines are cut by any transversal in four
harmonic points.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="34. Four harmonic planes" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p34" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">34. Four harmonic planes.</hi>  We also define <hi rend="font-style: italic">four harmonic
planes</hi> as four planes through a line which pass
one through each of four harmonic points, and we may
show that</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Four harmonic planes are cut by any plane not passing
through their common line in four harmonic lines, and also
by any line in four harmonic points.</hi></p>

<p>For let the planes α, β, γ, δ, which all pass through
the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">g</hi>, pass also through the four harmonic points
<hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>, so that α passes through <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, etc. Then it is
clear that any plane π through <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> will cut out
four harmonic lines from the four planes, for they are
<pb n="21" /><anchor id="Pg21" />
lines through the intersection <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> of <hi rend="font-style: italic">g</hi> with the plane
π, and they pass through the given harmonic points
<hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>. Any other plane σ cuts <hi rend="font-style: italic">g</hi> in a point <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> and
cuts α, β, γ, δ in four lines that meet π
in four points <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D'</hi> lying on <hi rend="font-style: italic">PA</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">PB</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">PC</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">PD</hi> respectively,
and are thus four harmonic hues. Further, any
ray cuts α, β, γ, δ in four harmonic points, since any
plane through the ray gives four harmonic lines of
intersection.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="35. Summary of results" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p35" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">35.</hi>  These results may be put together as follows:</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Given any two assemblages of points, rays, or planes,
perspectively related to each other, four harmonic elements
of one must correspond to four elements of the other which
are likewise harmonic.</hi></p>

<p>If, now, two forms are perspectively related to a third,
any four harmonic elements of one must correspond to
four harmonic elements in the other. We take this as
our definition of projective correspondence, and say:</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="36. Definition of projectivity" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p36" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">36. Definition of projectivity.</hi>  <hi rend="font-style: italic">Two fundamental forms
are protectively related to each other when a one-to-one correspondence
exists between the elements of the two and when
four harmonic elements of one correspond to four harmonic
elements of the other.</hi></p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image06.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 6</head>
<figDesc>Figure 6</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="37. Correspondence between harmonic conjugates" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p37" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">37. Correspondence between harmonic conjugates.</hi>  Given
four harmonic points, <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>; if we fix <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>,
then <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> vary together in a way that should be
thoroughly understood. To get a clear conception of
their relative motion we may fix the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> of
the quadrangle <hi rend="font-style: italic">K</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi> (Fig. 6). Then, as <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> describes
the point-row <hi rend="font-style: italic">AC</hi>, the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi> describes the point-row
<pb n="22" /><anchor id="Pg22" />
<hi rend="font-style: italic">AM</hi> perspective to it. Projecting <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi> again from <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, we
get a point-row <hi rend="font-style: italic">K</hi> on <hi rend="font-style: italic">AL</hi> perspective to the point-row
<hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi> and thus projective to the point-row <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>. Project the
point-row <hi rend="font-style: italic">K</hi> from <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> and we get a point-row <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> on
<hi rend="font-style: italic">AC</hi> again, which is projective to the point-row <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>. For
every point <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> we have thus one and only one point
<hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>, and conversely.
In other words, we
have set up a one-to-one
correspondence
between the
points of a single
point-row, which is
also a projective
correspondence because
four harmonic
points <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> correspond to four harmonic points <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>.
We may note also that the correspondence is here characterized
by a feature which does not always appear in
projective correspondences: namely, the same process
that carries one from <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> to <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> will carry one back from
<hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> to <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> again. This special property will receive further
study in the chapter on Involution.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="38. Separation of harmonic conjugates" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p38" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">38.</hi>  It is seen that as <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> approaches <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> also approaches
<hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>. As <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> moves from <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> toward <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> moves
from <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> in the opposite direction, passing through the
point at infinity on the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">AC</hi>, and returns on the
other side to meet <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> at <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> again. In other words, as <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>
traverses <hi rend="font-style: italic">AC</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> traverses the rest of the line from <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> to
<hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> through infinity. In all positions of <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, except at <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> or
<hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> are separated from each other by <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>.</p>

<pb n="23" /><anchor id="Pg23" /></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="39. Harmonic conjugate of the point at infinity" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p39" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">39. Harmonic conjugate of the point at infinity.</hi>  It is
natural to inquire what position of <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> corresponds to the
infinitely distant position of <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>. We have proved (§ 27)
that the particular quadrangle <hi rend="font-style: italic">K</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi> employed is
of no consequence. We shall therefore avail ourselves of
one that lends itself most readily to
the solution of the problem. We
choose the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi> so that the triangle
<hi rend="font-style: italic">ALC</hi> is isosceles (Fig. 7). Since
<hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> is supposed to be at infinity, the
line <hi rend="font-style: italic">KM</hi> is parallel to <hi rend="font-style: italic">AC</hi>. Therefore
the triangles <hi rend="font-style: italic">KAC</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">MAC</hi>
are equal, and the triangle <hi rend="font-style: italic">ANC</hi> is also isosceles. The
triangles <hi rend="font-style: italic">CNL</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">ANL</hi> are therefore equal, and the line
<hi rend="font-style: italic">LB</hi> bisects the angle <hi rend="font-style: italic">ALC</hi>. <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> is therefore the middle
point of <hi rend="font-style: italic">AC</hi>, and we have the theorem</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">The harmonic conjugate of the middle point of <hi rend="font-style: italic">AC</hi> is at
infinity.</hi></p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image07.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 7</head>
<figDesc>Figure 7</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="40. Projective theorems and metrical theorems. Linear
construction" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p40" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">40. Projective theorems and metrical theorems. Linear
construction.</hi> This theorem is the connecting link between
the general protective theorems which we have
been considering so far and the metrical theorems of
ordinary geometry. Up to this point we have said nothing
about measurements, either of line segments or of
angles. Desargues's theorem and the theory of harmonic
elements which depends on it have nothing to do with
magnitudes at all. Not until the notion of an infinitely
distant point is brought in is any mention made of
distances or directions. We have been able to make
all of our constructions up to this point by means of
the straightedge, or ungraduated ruler. A construction
<pb n="24" /><anchor id="Pg24" />
made with such an instrument we shall call a <hi rend="font-style: italic">linear</hi>
construction. It requires merely that we be able to
draw the line joining two points or find the point of
intersection of two lines.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="41. Parallels and mid-points" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p41" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">41. Parallels and mid-points.</hi>  It might be thought
that drawing a line through a given point parallel to
a given line was only a special case of drawing a line
joining two points. Indeed, it consists only in drawing
a line through the given point and through the
"infinitely distant point" on the given line. It must
be remembered, however, that the expression "infinitely
distant point" must not be taken literally. When we
say that two parallel lines meet "at infinity," we really
mean that they do not meet at all, and the only reason
for using the expression is to avoid tedious statement
of exceptions and restrictions to our theorems. We
ought therefore to consider the drawing of a line parallel
to a given line as a different accomplishment from
the drawing of the line joining two given points. It is
a remarkable consequence of the last theorem that a
parallel to a given line and the mid-point of a given
segment are equivalent data. For the construction is
reversible, and if we are given the middle point of a
given segment, we can construct <hi rend="font-style: italic">linearly</hi>  a line parallel to
that segment. Thus, given that <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> is the middle point of
<hi rend="font-style: italic">AC</hi>, we may draw any two lines through <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, and any line
through <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> cutting them in points <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi>. Join <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi> and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi> to <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> and get the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">K</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> on the two lines
through <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>. Then <hi rend="font-style: italic">KM</hi> is parallel to <hi rend="font-style: italic">AC</hi>. <hi rend="font-style: italic">The bisection of
a given segment and the drawing of a line parallel to the
segment are equivalent data when linear construction is used.</hi></p>

<pb n="25" /><anchor id="Pg25" /></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="42. Division of segment into equal parts" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p42" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">42.</hi>  It is not difficult to give a linear construction
for the problem to divide a given segment into <hi rend="font-style: italic">n</hi> equal
parts, given only a parallel to the segment. This is
simple enough when <hi rend="font-style: italic">n</hi> is a power of <hi rend="font-style: italic">2</hi>. For any other
number, such as <hi rend="font-style: italic">29</hi>, divide any segment on the line
parallel to <hi rend="font-style: italic">AC</hi> into <hi rend="font-style: italic">32</hi> equal parts, by a repetition of
the process just described. Take <hi rend="font-style: italic">29</hi> of these, and join
the first to <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and the last to <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>. Let these joining lines
meet in <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>. Join <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> to all the other points. Other
problems, of a similar sort, are given at the end of
the chapter.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="43. Numerical relations" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p43" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">43. Numerical relations.</hi>  Since three points, given in
order, are sufficient to determine a fourth, as explained
above, it ought to be possible to reproduce the process
numerically in view of the one-to-one correspondence
which exists between points on a line and numbers; a
correspondence which, to be sure, we have not established
here, but which is discussed in any treatise
on the theory of point sets. We proceed to discover
what relation between four numbers corresponds to the
harmonic relation between
four points.</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image08.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 8</head>
<figDesc>Figure 8</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="44. Algebraic formula connecting four harmonic points" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p44" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">44.</hi>  Let <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> be four
harmonic points (Fig. 8), and
let <hi rend="font-style: italic">SA</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">SB</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">SC</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">SD</hi> be four
harmonic lines. Assume a
line drawn through <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> parallel
to <hi rend="font-style: italic">SD</hi>, meeting <hi rend="font-style: italic">SA</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi> and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">SC</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi>. Then <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi>, and the infinitely distant
point on <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'C'</hi> are four harmonic points, and therefore
<hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> is the middle point of the segment <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'C'</hi>. Then, since
<pb n="26" /><anchor id="Pg26" />
the triangle <hi rend="font-style: italic">DAS</hi> is similar to the triangle <hi rend="font-style: italic">BAA'</hi>, we
may write the proportion</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">AB : AD = BA' : SD.</hi>
</p>

<p>Also, from the similar triangles <hi rend="font-style: italic">DSC</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">BCC'</hi>, we have</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">CD : CB = SD : B'C.</hi>
</p>

<p>From these two proportions we have, remembering that
<hi rend="font-style: italic">BA' = BC'</hi>,</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<formula notation="tex">\[
\frac{AB \cdot CD}{AD \cdot CB} = -1,
\]</formula>
</p>

<p>the minus sign being given to the ratio on account of the
fact that <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> are always separated from <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>,
so that one or three of the segments <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">CD</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">AD</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">CB</hi>
must be negative.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="45. Further formulae" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p45" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">45.</hi>  Writing the last equation in the form</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">CB : AB = -CD : AD,</hi>
</p>

<p>and using the fundamental relation connecting three
points on a line,</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">PR + RQ = PQ,</hi>
</p>

<p>which holds for all positions of the three points if
account be taken of the sign of the segments, the last
proportion may be written</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">(CB - BA) : AB = -(CA - DA) : AD,</hi>
</p>

<p>or</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">(AB - AC) : AB = (AC - AD) : AD;</hi>
</p>

<p>so that <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">AC</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">AD</hi> are three quantities in hamonic
progression, since the difference between the first
and second is to the first as the difference between the
second and third is to the third. Also, from this last
proportion comes the familiar relation</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<formula notation="tex">\[
\frac{2}{AC} = \frac{1}{AB} + \frac{1}{AD},
\]</formula>
</p>

<p>which is convenient for the computation of the distance
<hi rend="font-style: italic">AD</hi> when <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">AC</hi> are given numerically.</p>

<pb n="27" /><anchor id="Pg27" /></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="46. Anharmonic ratio" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p46" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">46. Anharmonic ratio.</hi>  The corresponding relations
between the trigonometric functions of the angles determined
by four harmonic lines are not difficult to obtain,
but as we shall not need them in building up the
theory of projective geometry, we will not discuss them
here. Students who have a slight acquaintance with
trigonometry may read in a later chapter (§ 161) a
development of the theory of a more general relation,
called the <hi rend="font-style: italic">anharmonic ratio</hi>, or <hi rend="font-style: italic">cross ratio</hi>, which connects
any four points on a line.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<head>PROBLEMS</head>

<p><hi rend="font-weight: bold">1</hi>. Draw through a given point a line which shall pass
through the inaccessible point of intersection of two given
lines. The following construction may be made to depend
upon Desargues's theorem: Through the given point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> draw
any two rays cutting the two lines in the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB'</hi> and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">A'B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, lying on one of the given lines and <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi>, on the
other. Join <hi rend="font-style: italic">AA'</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">BB'</hi>, and find their point of intersection
<hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>. Through <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> draw any other ray, cutting the given
lines in <hi rend="font-style: italic">CC'</hi>. Join <hi rend="font-style: italic">BC'</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'C</hi>, and obtain their point
of intersection <hi rend="font-style: italic">Q</hi>. <hi rend="font-style: italic">PQ</hi> is the desired line. Justify this
construction.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-weight: bold">2.</hi>  To draw through a given point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> a line which shall
meet two given lines in points <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, equally distant from
<hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>. Justify the following construction: Join <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> to the point
<hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> of intersection of the two given lines. Construct the
fourth harmonic of <hi rend="font-style: italic">PS</hi> with respect to the two given lines.
Draw through <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> a line parallel to this line. This is the
required line.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-weight: bold">3.</hi>  Given a parallelogram in the same plane with a given
segment <hi rend="font-style: italic">AC</hi>, to construct linearly the middle point of <hi rend="font-style: italic">AC</hi>.</p>

<pb n="28" /><anchor id="Pg28" />

<p><hi rend="font-weight: bold">4.</hi>  Given four harmonic lines, of which one pair are at
right angles to each other, show that the other pair make
equal angles with them. This is a theorem of which frequent
use will be made.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-weight: bold">5.</hi>  Given the middle point of a line segment, to draw a
line parallel to the segment and passing through a given
point.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-weight: bold">6.</hi>  A line is drawn cutting the sides of a triangle <hi rend="font-style: italic">ABC</hi> in
the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi> the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi> lying on the side <hi rend="font-style: italic">BC</hi>, etc.
The harmonic conjugate of <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi> with respect to <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> is
then constructed and called <hi rend="font-style: italic">A"</hi>. Similarly, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B"</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C"</hi> are
constructed. Show that <hi rend="font-style: italic">A"B"C"</hi> lie on a straight line. Find
other sets of three points on a line in the figure. Find also
sets of three lines through a point.</p>
</div>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n="29" /><anchor id="Pg29" />
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER III - COMBINATION OF TWO PROJECTIVELY RELATED
FUNDAMENTAL FORMS</head>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="47. Superposed fundamental forms. Self-corresponding
elements" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image09.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 9</head>
<figDesc>Figure 9</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p><anchor id="p47" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">47. Superposed fundamental forms. Self-corresponding
elements.</hi> We have seen (§ 37) that two projective
point-rows may be superposed upon the same straight
line. This happens, for example, when two pencils
which are projective to each other are cut across by
a straight line. It is also possible for two projective
pencils to have the same center. This happens, for
example, when two projective point-rows are projected
to the same point. Similarly, two projective axial pencils
may have the same axis. We examine now the
possibility of two forms related in this way, having
an element or elements that correspond to themselves.
We have seen, indeed, that if <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> are harmonic
conjugates with respect to <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, then the point-row
described by <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> is projective to the point-row described
by <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>, and that <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> are self-corresponding
points. Consider more generally the case of two pencils
perspective to each other with axis of perspectivity <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi>
(Fig. 9). Cut across them by a line <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi>. We get thus
two projective point-rows superposed on the same line
<hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi>, and a moment's reflection serves to show that the
point <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi> of intersection <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi> corresponds to itself
in the two point-rows. Also, the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>, where <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi>
<pb n="30" /><anchor id="Pg30" />
intersects the line joining the centers of the two pencils,
is seen to correspond to itself. It is thus possible
for two projective point-rows,
superposed upon
the same line, to have two
self-corresponding points.
Clearly <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi> may
fall together if the line
joining the centers of the
pencils happens to pass
through the point of intersection
of the lines <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi>
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi>.</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image10.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 10</head>
<figDesc>Figure 10</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="48. Special case" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p48" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">48.</hi>  We may also give an illustration of a case
where two superposed projective point-rows have no
self-corresponding points at all. Thus we may take
two lines revolving about a fixed
point <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> and always making the
same angle a with each other
(Fig. 10). They will cut out on
any line <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> in the plane two point-rows
which are easily seen to be
projective. For, given any four
rays <hi rend="font-style: italic">SP</hi> which are harmonic, the
four corresponding rays <hi rend="font-style: italic">SP'</hi> must
also be harmonic, since they make
the same angles with each other.
Four harmonic points <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> correspond,
therefore, to four harmonic points <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi>. It is clear,
however, that no point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> can coincide with its corresponding
point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi>, for in that case the lines <hi rend="font-style: italic">PS</hi> and
<pb n="31" /><anchor id="Pg31" />
<hi rend="font-style: italic">P'S</hi> would coincide, which is impossible if the angle
between them is to be constant.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="49. Fundamental theorem. Postulate of continuity" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p49" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">49. Fundamental theorem. Postulate of continuity.</hi>
We have thus shown that two projective point-rows,
superposed one on the other, may have two points, one
point, or no point at all corresponding to themselves.
We proceed to show that</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">If two projective point-rows, superposed upon the same
straight line, have more than two self-corresponding points,
they must have an infinite number, and every point corresponds
to itself; that is, the two point-rows are not
essentially distinct.</hi></p>

<p>If three points, <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, are self-corresponding,
then the harmonic conjugate <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> of <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> with respect to <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> must also correspond to itself. For four harmonic
points must always correspond to four harmonic points.
In the same way the harmonic conjugate of <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> with
respect to <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> must correspond to itself. Combining
new points with old in this way, we may obtain as many
self-corresponding points as we wish. We show further
that every point on the line is the limiting point of a
finite or infinite sequence of self-corresponding points.
Thus, let a point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> lie between <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>. Construct
now <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>, the fourth harmonic of <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> with respect to <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>. <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> may coincide with <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>, in which case the sequence
is closed; otherwise <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> lies in the stretch <hi rend="font-style: italic">AD</hi> or in the
stretch <hi rend="font-style: italic">DB</hi>. If it lies in the stretch <hi rend="font-style: italic">DB</hi>, construct the
fourth harmonic of <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> with respect to <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>. This
point <hi rend="font-style: italic">D'</hi> may coincide with <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>, in which case, as before,
the sequence is closed. If <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> lies in the stretch <hi rend="font-style: italic">DD'</hi>,
we construct the fourth harmonic of <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> with respect
<pb n="32" /><anchor id="Pg32" />
to <hi rend="font-style: italic">DD'</hi>, etc. In each step the region in which <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> lies is
diminished, and the process may be continued until two
self-corresponding points are obtained on either side of
<hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>, and at distances from it arbitrarily small.</p>

<p>We now assume, explicitly, the fundamental postulate
that the correspondence is <hi rend="font-style: italic">continuous</hi>, that is, that <hi rend="font-style: italic">the
distance between two points in one point-row may be made
arbitrarily small by sufficiently diminishing the distance
between the corresponding points in the other.</hi> Suppose
now that <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> is not a self-corresponding point, but corresponds
to a point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi> at a fixed distance <hi rend="font-style: italic">d</hi> from <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>.
As noted above, we can find self-corresponding points
arbitrarily close to <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>, and it appears, then, that we can
take a point <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> as close to <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> as we wish, and yet the
distance between the corresponding points <hi rend="font-style: italic">D'</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi>
approaches <hi rend="font-style: italic">d</hi> as a limit, and not zero, which contradicts
the postulate of continuity.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="50. Extension of theorem to pencils of rays and planes" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p50" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">50.</hi>  It follows also that two projective pencils which
have the same center may have no more than two self-corresponding
rays, unless the pencils are identical. For
if we cut across them by a line, we obtain two projective
point-rows superposed on the same straight line,
which may have no more than two self-corresponding
points. The same considerations apply to two projective
axial pencils which have the same axis.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="51. Projective point-rows having a self-corresponding
point in common" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p51" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">51. Projective point-rows having a self-corresponding
point in common.</hi> Consider now two projective point-rows
lying on different lines in the same plane. Their
common point may or may not be a self-corresponding
point. If the two point-rows are perspectively related,
then their common point is evidently a self-corresponding
<pb n="33" /><anchor id="Pg33" />
point. The converse is also true, and we have the very
important theorem:</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="52. Point-rows in perspective position" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p52" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">52.</hi>  <hi rend="font-style: italic">If in two protective point-rows, the point of intersection
corresponds to itself, then the point-rows are in
perspective position.</hi></p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image11.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 11</head>
<figDesc>Figure 11</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>Let the two point-rows be <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi> (Fig. 11). Let
<hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi>, be corresponding points, and let
also the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> of intersection of <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi> correspond
to itself. Let <hi rend="font-style: italic">AA'</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">BB'</hi> meet in the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>. Take
<hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> as the center of two pencils,
one perspective to <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> and the other
perspective to <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi>. In these two
pencils <hi rend="font-style: italic">SA</hi> coincides with its corresponding
ray <hi rend="font-style: italic">SA'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">SB</hi> with its
corresponding ray <hi rend="font-style: italic">SB'</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">SM</hi>
with its corresponding ray <hi rend="font-style: italic">SM'</hi>.
The two pencils are thus identical, by the preceding
theorem, and any ray <hi rend="font-style: italic">SD</hi> must coincide with its corresponding
ray <hi rend="font-style: italic">SD'</hi>. Corresponding points of <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi>,
therefore, all lie on lines through the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="53. Pencils in perspective position" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p53" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">53.</hi>  An entirely similar discussion shows that</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">If in two projective pencils the line joining their centers
is a self-corresponding ray, then the two pencils are
perspectively related.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="54. Axial pencils in perspective position" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p54" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">54.</hi>  A similar theorem may be stated for two axial
pencils of which the axes intersect. Very frequent use
will be made of these fundamental theorems.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="55. Point-row of the second order" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p55" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">55. Point-row of the second order.</hi>  The question naturally
arises, What is the locus of points of intersection
of corresponding rays of two projective pencils
<pb n="34" /><anchor id="Pg34" />
which are not in perspective position? This locus,
which will be discussed in detail in subsequent chapters,
is easily seen to have at most two points in common
with any line in the plane, and on account of this
fundamental property will be called a <hi rend="font-style: italic">point-row of the
second order</hi>. For any line <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> in the plane of the two
pencils will be cut by them in two projective point-rows
which have at most two self-corresponding points.
Such a self-corresponding point is clearly a point of
intersection of corresponding rays of the two pencils.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="56. Degeneration of locus" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p56" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">56.</hi>  This locus degenerates in the case of two perspective
pencils to a pair of straight lines, one of which
is the axis of perspectivity and the other the common
ray, any point of which may be considered as the point
of intersection of corresponding rays of the two pencils.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="57. Pencils of rays of the second order" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p57" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">57. Pencils of rays of the second order.</hi>  Similar investigations
may be made concerning the system of lines
joining corresponding points of two projective point-rows.
If we project the point-rows to any point in the
plane, we obtain two projective pencils having the same
center. At most two pairs of self-corresponding rays
may present themselves. Such a ray is clearly a line
joining two corresponding points in the two point-rows.
The result may be stated as follows: <hi rend="font-style: italic">The system of rays
joining corresponding points in two protective point-rows
has at most two rays in common with any pencil in the
plane.</hi> For that reason the system of rays is called <hi rend="font-style: italic">a
pencil of rays of the second order.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="58. Degenerate case" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p58" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">58.</hi>  In the case of two perspective point-rows this
system of rays degenerates into two pencils of rays of
the first order, one of which has its center at the center
<pb n="35" /><anchor id="Pg35" />
of perspectivity of the two point-rows, and the other at
the intersection of the two point-rows, any ray through
which may be considered as joining two corresponding
points of the two point-rows.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="59. Cone of the second order" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p59" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">59. Cone of the second order.</hi>  The corresponding
theorems in space may easily be obtained by joining
the points and lines considered in the plane theorems
to a point <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> in space. Two projective pencils give rise
to two projective axial pencils with axes intersecting.
Corresponding planes meet in lines which all pass
through <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> and through the points on a point-row of
the second order generated by the two pencils of rays.
They are thus generating lines of a <hi rend="font-style: italic">cone of the second
order</hi>, or <hi rend="font-style: italic">quadric cone</hi>, so called because every plane in
space not passing through <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> cuts it in a point-row of
the second order, and every line also cuts it in at most
two points. If, again, we project two point-rows to a
point <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> in space, we obtain two pencils of rays with a
common center but lying in different planes. Corresponding
lines of these pencils determine planes which
are the projections to <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> of the lines which join the corresponding
points of the two point-rows. At most two
such planes may pass through any ray through <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>. It
is called <hi rend="font-style: italic">a pencil of planes of the second order</hi>.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<head>PROBLEMS</head>

<p><hi rend="font-weight: bold">1. </hi> A man <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> moves along a straight road <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi>, and another
man <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> moves along the same road and walks so as always
to keep sight of <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> in a small mirror <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> at the side of the
road. How many times will they come together, <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> moving
always in the same direction along the road?</p>

<pb n="36" /><anchor id="Pg36" />

<p>2. How many times would the two men in the first problem
see each other in two mirrors <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi> as they walk
along the road as before? (The planes of the two mirrors
are not necessarily parallel to <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi>.)</p>

<p>3. As A moves along <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi>, trace the path of B so that the
two men may always see each other in the two mirrors.</p>

<p>4. Two boys walk along two paths <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi> each holding
a string which they keep stretched tightly between them.
They both move at constant but different rates of speed,
letting out the string or drawing it in as they walk. How
many times will the line of the string pass over any given
point in the plane of the paths?</p>

<p>5. Trace the lines of the string when the two boys move
at the same rate of speed in the two paths but do not start
at the same time from the point where the two paths
intersect.</p>

<p>6. A ship is sailing on a straight course and keeps a gun
trained on a point on the shore. Show that a line at right
angles to the direction of the gun at its muzzle will pass
through any point in the plane twice or not at all. (Consider
the point-row at infinity cut out by a line through the
point on the shore at right angles to the direction of
the gun.)</p>

<p>7. Two lines <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi> revolve about two points <hi rend="font-style: italic">U</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">U'</hi>
respectively in the same plane. They go in the same direction
and at the same rate of speed, but one has an angle a
the start of the other. Show that they generate a point-row
of the second order.</p>

<p>8. Discuss the question given in the last problem when
the two lines revolve in opposite directions. Can you
recognize the locus?</p>
</div>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n="37" /><anchor id="Pg37" />
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER IV - POINT-ROWS OF THE SECOND ORDER</head>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="60. Point-row of the second order defined" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p60" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">60. Point-row of the second order defined.</hi>  We have
seen that two fundamental forms in one-to-one correspondence
may sometimes generate a form of higher
order. Thus, two point-rows (§ 55) generate a system of
rays of the second order, and two pencils of rays (§ 57),
a system of points of the second order. As a system of
points is more familiar to most students of geometry
than a system of lines, we study first the point-row of
the second order.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="61. Tangent line" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p61" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">61. Tangent line.</hi>  We have shown in the last chapter
(§ 55) that the locus of intersection of corresponding
rays of two projective pencils is a point-row of the
second order; that is, it has at most two points in common
with any line in the plane. It is clear, first of all,
that the centers of the pencils are points of the locus;
for to the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">SS'</hi>, considered as a ray of <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>, must
correspond some ray of <hi rend="font-style: italic">S'</hi> which meets it in <hi rend="font-style: italic">S'</hi>. <hi rend="font-style: italic">S'</hi>,
and by the same argument <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>, is then a point where
corresponding rays meet. Any ray through <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> will meet
it in one point besides <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>, namely, the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> where
it meets its corresponding ray. Now, by choosing the
ray through <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> sufficiently close to the ray <hi rend="font-style: italic">SS'</hi>, the point
<hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> may be made to approach arbitrarily close to <hi rend="font-style: italic">S'</hi>, and
the ray <hi rend="font-style: italic">S'P</hi> may be made to differ in position from the
<pb n="38" /><anchor id="Pg38" />
tangent line at <hi rend="font-style: italic">S'</hi> by as little as we please. We have,
then, the important theorem</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">The ray at <hi rend="font-style: italic">S'</hi> which corresponds to the common ray <hi rend="font-style: italic">SS'</hi>
is tangent to the locus at <hi rend="font-style: italic">S'</hi>.</hi></p>

<p>In the same manner the tangent at <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> may be
constructed.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="62. Determination of the locus" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p62" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">62. Determination of the locus.</hi>  We now show that
<hi rend="font-style: italic">it is possible to assign arbitrarily the position of three
points, <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, on the locus (besides the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">S'</hi>); but, these three points being chosen, the locus is
completely determined.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="63. Restatement of the problem" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p63" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">63.</hi>  This statement is equivalent to the following:</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Given three pairs of corresponding rays in two projective
pencils, it is possible to find a ray of one which corresponds
to any ray of the other.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="64. Solution of the fundamental problem" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p64" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">64.</hi>  We proceed, then, to the solution of the fundamental</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Problem</hi>: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Given three pairs of rays, <hi rend="font-style: italic">aa'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">bb'</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">cc'</hi>,
of two protective pencils, <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">S'</hi>, to find the ray <hi rend="font-style: italic">d'</hi> of <hi rend="font-style: italic">S'</hi>
which corresponds to any ray <hi rend="font-style: italic">d</hi> of <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>.</hi></p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image12.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 12</head>
<figDesc>Figure 12</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>Call <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> the intersection of <hi rend="font-style: italic">aa'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> the intersection of <hi rend="font-style: italic">bb'</hi>,
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> the intersection of <hi rend="font-style: italic">cc'</hi> (Fig. 12). Join <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi> by the
line <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">AC</hi> by the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi>. Consider <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> as a point-row
perspective to <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi> as a point-row perspective
to <hi rend="font-style: italic">S'</hi>. <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi> are projectively related to each other,
since <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">S'</hi> are, by hypothesis, so related. But their
point of intersection <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> is a self-corresponding point, since
<hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">a'</hi> were supposed to be corresponding rays. It follows
(§ 52) that <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi> are in perspective position,
and that lines through corresponding points all pass
<pb n="39" /><anchor id="Pg39" />
through a point <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>, the center of perspectivity, the
position of which will be determined by any two such
lines. But the intersection of <hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi> with <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> and the intersection
of <hi rend="font-style: italic">c'</hi> with <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi> are corresponding points on <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi>,
and the line joining them is clearly <hi rend="font-style: italic">c</hi> itself. Similarly,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">b'</hi> joins two corresponding points on <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi>, and so the
center <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> of perspectivity of <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi> is the intersection
of <hi rend="font-style: italic">c</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">b'</hi>. To find <hi rend="font-style: italic">d'</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">S'</hi> corresponding to a given
line <hi rend="font-style: italic">d</hi> of <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> we note the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi> where <hi rend="font-style: italic">d</hi> meets <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi>. Join
<hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi> to <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> and get the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi> where this line meets <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi>.
<hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi> are corresponding points on <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">d'</hi>
must therefore pass through <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi>. The intersection <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> of
<hi rend="font-style: italic">d</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">d'</hi> is thus another point on the locus. In the same
manner any number of other points may be obtained.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="65. Different constructions for the figure" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p65" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">65.</hi>  The lines <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi> might have been drawn in
any direction through <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> (avoiding, of course, the line
<hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi> for <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> and the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">a'</hi> for <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi>), and the center of perspectivity
<hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> would be easily obtainable; but the above
construction furnishes a simple and instructive figure.
An equally simple one is obtained by taking <hi rend="font-style: italic">a'</hi> for <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi>
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi> for <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi>.</p>

<pb n="40" /><anchor id="Pg40" /></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="66. Lines joining four points of the locus to a fifth" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p66" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">66. Lines joining four points of the locus to a fifth.</hi>
Suppose that the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">S'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> are fixed,
and that four points, <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">A<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">1</hi></hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">A<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">2</hi></hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">A<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">3</hi></hi>, are taken on the
locus at the intersection with it of any four harmonic
rays through <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>. These four harmonic rays give four
harmonic points, <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">L<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">1</hi></hi> etc., on the fixed ray <hi rend="font-style: italic">SD</hi>. These,
in turn, project through the fixed point <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> into four
harmonic points, <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">N<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">1</hi></hi> etc., on the fixed line <hi rend="font-style: italic">DS'</hi>.
These last four harmonic points give four harmonic
rays <hi rend="font-style: italic">CA</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">CA<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">1</hi></hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">CA<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">2</hi></hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">CA<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">3</hi></hi>. Therefore the four points <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>
which project to <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> in four harmonic rays also project
to <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> in four harmonic rays. But <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> may be any
point on the locus, and so we have the very important
theorem,</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Four points which are on the locus, and which project
to a fifth point of the locus in four harmonic rays, project
to any point of the locus in four harmonic rays.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="67. Restatement of the theorem" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p67" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">67.</hi>  The theorem may also be stated thus:</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">The locus of points from which, four given points are
seen along four harmonic rays is a point-row of the second
order through them.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="68. Further important theorem" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p68" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">68.</hi>  A further theorem of prime importance also
follows:</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Any two points on the locus may be taken as the centers
of two projective pencils which will generate the locus.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="69. Pascal's theorem" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p69" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">69. Pascal's theorem.</hi>  The points <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>, and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">S'</hi> may thus be considered as chosen arbitrarily on the
locus, and the following remarkable theorem follows
at once.</p>

<pb n="41" /><anchor id="Pg41" />

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Given six points, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, on the point-row of
the second order, if we call</hi></p>

<p rend="text-align: center"><hi rend="font-style: italic">L the intersection of 12 with 45,</hi></p>
<p rend="text-align: center"><hi rend="font-style: italic">M the intersection of 23 with 56,</hi></p>
<p rend="text-align: center"><hi rend="font-style: italic">N the intersection of 34 with 61,</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">then <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi> are on a straight line.</hi></p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image13.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 13</head>
<figDesc>Figure 13</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="70. Permutation of points in Pascal's theorem" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p70" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">70.</hi>  To get the notation to correspond to the figure, we
may take (Fig. 13) <hi rend="font-style: italic">A = 1</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B = 2</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">S' = 3</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D = 4</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">S = 5</hi>, and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">C = 6</hi>. If we make <hi rend="font-style: italic">A = 1</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C=2</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">S=3</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D = 4</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">S'=5</hi>, and.
<hi rend="font-style: italic">B = 6</hi>, the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi> are interchanged, but the line
is left unchanged.
It is clear that one
point may be named
arbitrarily and the
other five named in
<hi rend="font-style: italic">5! = 120</hi> different
ways, but since, as
we have seen, two
different assignments
of names give the
same line, it follows
that there cannot be
more than 60 different
lines <hi rend="font-style: italic">LMN</hi> obtained in this way from a given set of
six points. As a matter of fact, the number obtained in
this way is in general <hi rend="font-style: italic">60</hi>. The above theorem, which
is of cardinal importance in the theory of the point-row
of the second order, is due to Pascal and was discovered
by him at the age of sixteen. It is, no doubt, the most
important contribution to the theory of these loci since
<pb n="42" /><anchor id="Pg42" />
the days of Apollonius. If the six points be called the
vertices of a hexagon inscribed in the curve, then the
sides 12 and 45 may be appropriately called a pair of
opposite sides. Pascal's theorem, then, may be stated
as follows:</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">The three pairs of opposite sides of a hexagon inscribed in
a point-row of the second order meet in three points on a line.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="71. Harmonic points on a point-row of the second order" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p71" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">71. Harmonic points on a point-row of the second order.</hi>
Before proceeding to develop the consequences of this
theorem, we note another result of the utmost importance
for the higher developments of pure geometry,
which follows from the fact that if four points on the
locus project to a fifth in four harmonic rays, they will
project to any point of the locus in four harmonic rays.
It is natural to speak of four such points as four harmonic
points on the locus, and to use this notion to
define projective correspondence between point-rows of
the second order, or between a point-row of the second
order and any fundamental form of the first order.
Thus, in particular, the point-row of the second order,
σ, is said to be <hi rend="font-style: italic">perspectively related</hi> to the pencil <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> when
every ray on <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> goes through the point on σ which
corresponds to it.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="72. Determination of the locus" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p72" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">72. Determination of the locus.</hi>  It is now clear that
five points, arbitrarily chosen in the plane, are sufficient
to determine a point-row of the second order through
them. Two of the points may be taken as centers of
two projective pencils, and the three others will determine
three pairs of corresponding rays of the pencils,
and therefore all pairs. If four points of the locus are
<pb n="43" /><anchor id="Pg43" />
given, together with the tangent at one of them, the
locus is likewise completely determined. For if the point
at which the tangent is given be taken as the center <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>
of one pencil, and any other of the points for <hi rend="font-style: italic">S'</hi>, then,
besides the two pairs of corresponding rays determined
by the remaining two points, we have one more pair,
consisting of the tangent at <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> and the ray <hi rend="font-style: italic">SS'</hi>. Similarly,
the curve is determined by three points and the
tangents at two of them.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="73. Circles and conics as point-rows of the second order" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p73" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">73. Circles and conics as point-rows of the second order.</hi>
It is not difficult to see that a circle is a point-row of
the second order. Indeed, take any point <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> on the circle
and draw four harmonic rays through it. They will cut
the circle in four points, which will project to any other
point of the curve in four harmonic rays; for, by the
theorem concerning the angles inscribed in a circle, the
angles involved in the second set of four lines are
the same as those in the first set. If, moreover, we project
the figure to any point in space, we shall get a cone,
standing on a circular base, generated by two projective
axial pencils which are the projections of the pencils
at <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">S'</hi>. Cut across, now, by any plane, and we get
a conic section which is thus exhibited as the locus of
intersection of two projective pencils. It thus appears
that a conic section is a point-row of the second order.
It will later appear that a point-row of the second order
is a conic section. In the future, therefore, we shall
refer to a point-row of the second order as a conic.</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image14.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 14</head>
<figDesc>Figure 14</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="74. Conic through five points" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p74" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">74. Conic through five points.</hi>  Pascal's theorem furnishes
an elegant solution of the problem of drawing a
conic through five given points. To construct a sixth
<pb n="44" /><anchor id="Pg44" />
point on the conic, draw through the point numbered 1
an arbitrary line (Fig. 14), and let the desired point
6 be the second point of intersection
of this line with the conic. The point
<hi rend="font-style: italic">L = 12-45</hi> is obtainable at once; also
the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">N = 34-61</hi>. But <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi>
determine Pascal's line, and the intersection
of 23 with 56 must be on
this line. Intersect, then, the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">LN</hi>
with 23 and obtain the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>. Join
<hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> to 5 and intersect with 61 for the desired point 6.</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image15.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 15</head>
<figDesc>Figure 15</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="75. Tangent to a conic" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p75" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">75. Tangent to a conic.</hi>  If two points of Pascal's hexagon
approach coincidence, then the line joining them
approaches as a limiting position the tangent line at that
point. Pascal's theorem thus affords a ready method of
drawing the tangent line to a conic
at a given point. If the conic is determined
by the points 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
(Fig. 15), and it is desired to draw
the tangent at the point 1, we may
call that point 1, 6. The points
<hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> are obtained as usual,
and the intersection of 34 with <hi rend="font-style: italic">LM</hi>
gives <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi>. Join <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi> to the point 1 for
the desired tangent at that point.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="76. Inscribed quadrangle" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p76" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">76. Inscribed quadrangle.</hi>  Two pairs of vertices may
coalesce, giving an inscribed quadrangle. Pascal's theorem
gives for this case the very important theorem</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Two pairs of opposite sides of any quadrangle inscribed
in a conic meet on a straight line, upon which line also
intersect the two pairs of tangents at the opposite vertices.</hi></p>

<pb n="45" /><anchor id="Pg45" />

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image16.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 16</head>
<figDesc>Figure 16</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image17.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 17</head>
<figDesc>Figure 17</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>For let the vertices be <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>, and call the
vertex <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> the point 1, 6; <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, the point 2; <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, the point
3, 4; and <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>, the point 5 (Fig. 16). Pascal's theorem then
indicates that
<hi rend="font-style: italic">L = AB-CD</hi>,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">M = AD-BC</hi>,
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi>, which
is the intersection
of the
tangents at <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, are all
on a straight
line <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi>. But
if we were to
call <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> the point 2, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> the point 6, 1, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> the point 5, and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> the point 4, 3, then the intersection <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> of the tangents
at <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> are also on this same
line <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi>. Thus <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> are
four points on a straight line.
The consequences of this theorem
are so numerous and important
that we shall devote a separate
chapter to them.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="77. Inscribed triangle" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p77" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">77. Inscribed triangle.</hi>  Finally,
three of the vertices of the hexagon
may coalesce, giving a triangle
inscribed in a conic. Pascal's
theorem then reads as follows (Fig. 17) for this case:</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">The three tangents at the vertices of a triangle inscribed
in a conic meet the opposite sides in three points on a
straight line.</hi></p>

<pb n="46" /><anchor id="Pg46" />

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image18.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 18</head>
<figDesc>Figure 18</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="78. Degenerate conic" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p78" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">78. Degenerate conic.</hi>  If we apply Pascal's theorem
to a degenerate conic made up of a pair of straight
lines, we get the
following theorem
(Fig. 18):</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">If three points,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, are
chosen on one
line, and three
points, <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi>,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi>, are chosen on
another, then the
three points <hi rend="font-style: italic">L = AB'-A'B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">M = BC'-B'C</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">N = CA'-C'A</hi>
are all on a straight line.</hi></p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<head>PROBLEMS</head>

<p>1. In Fig. 12, select different lines <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> and trace the locus
of the center of perspectivity <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> of the lines <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi>.</p>

<p>2. Given four points, <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>, in the plane, construct
a fifth point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> such that the lines <hi rend="font-style: italic">PA</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">PB</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">PC</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">PD</hi> shall be
four harmonic lines.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Suggestion.</hi> Draw a line <hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi> through the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> such that the four
lines <hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">AC</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">AD</hi> are harmonic. Construct now a conic through
<hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> having <hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi> for a tangent at <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>.</p>

<p>3. Where are all the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>, as determined in the
preceding question, to be found?</p>

<p>4. Select any five points in the plane and draw the tangent
to the conic through them at each of the five points.</p>

<p>5. Given four points on the conic, and the tangent at one of
them, to construct the conic. ("To construct the conic" means
here to construct as many other points as may be desired.)</p>

<pb n="47" /><anchor id="Pg47" />

<p>6.  Given three points on the conic, and the tangent at
two of them, to construct the conic.</p>

<p>7.  Given five points, two of which are at infinity in
different directions, to construct the conic. (In this, and
in the following examples, the student is supposed to be
able to draw a line parallel to a given line.)</p>

<p>8.  Given four points on a conic (two of which are at infinity
and two in the finite part of the plane), together with
the tangent at one of the finite points, to construct the conic.</p>

<p>9.  The tangents to a curve at its infinitely distant points
are called its <hi rend="font-style: italic">asymptotes</hi> if they pass through a finite part
of the plane. Given the asymptotes and a finite point of a
conic, to construct the conic.</p>

<p>10.  Given an asymptote and three finite points on the
conic, to determine the conic.</p>

<p>11.  Given four points, one of which is at infinity, and
given also that the line at infinity is a tangent line, to
construct the conic.</p>
</div>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="48" /><anchor id="Pg48" />
<head>CHAPTER V - PENCILS OF RAYS OF THE SECOND ORDER</head>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="79. Pencil of rays of the second order defined" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p79" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">79. Pencil of rays of the second order defined.</hi>  If the
corresponding points of two projective point-rows be
joined by straight lines, a system of lines is obtained
which is called a pencil of rays of the second order.
This name arises from the fact, easily shown (§ 57), that
at most two lines of the system may pass through any
arbitrary point in the plane. For if through any point
there should pass three lines of the system, then this
point might be taken as the center of two projective
pencils, one projecting one point-row and the other projecting
the other. Since, now, these pencils have three
rays of one coincident with the corresponding rays of
the other, the two are identical and the two point-rows
are in perspective position, which was not supposed.</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image19.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 19</head>
<figDesc>Figure 19</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="80. Tangents to a circle" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p80" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">80. Tangents to a circle.</hi>  To get a clear notion of this
system of lines, we may first show that the tangents
to a circle form a system of this kind. For take any
two tangents, <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi>, to a circle, and let <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>
be the points of contact (Fig. 19). Let now <hi rend="font-style: italic">t</hi> be any
third tangent with point of contact at <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> and meeting <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi>
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi> respectively. Join <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi>, and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> to <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi>, the center of the circle. Tangents from any
point to a circle are equal, and therefore the triangles
<hi rend="font-style: italic">POA</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">POC</hi> are equal, as also are the triangles <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'OB</hi>
<pb n="49" /><anchor id="Pg49" />
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'OC</hi>. Therefore the angle <hi rend="font-style: italic">POP'</hi> is constant, being
equal to half the constant angle <hi rend="font-style: italic">AOC + COB</hi>. This
being true, if we take any four harmonic points, <hi rend="font-style: italic">P<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">1</hi></hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">P<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">2</hi></hi>,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">P<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">3</hi></hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">P<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">4</hi></hi>, on the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi>, they will project to <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi> in four
harmonic lines, and the tangents
to the circle from these four
points will meet <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi> in four harmonic
points, <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">1</hi></hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">2</hi></hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">3</hi></hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">4</hi></hi>, because
the lines from these points
to <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi> inclose the same angles as
the lines from the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">P<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">1</hi></hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">P<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">2</hi></hi>,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">P<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">3</hi></hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">P<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">4</hi></hi> on <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi>. The point-row on <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> is therefore projective
to the point-row on <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi>. Thus the tangents to a circle
are seen to join corresponding points on two projective
point-rows, and so, according to the definition, form a
pencil of rays of the second order.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="81. Tangents to a conic" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p81" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">81. Tangents to a conic.</hi>  If now this figure be projected
to a point outside the plane of the circle, and
any section of the resulting cone be made by a plane,
we can easily see that the system of rays tangent to any
conic section is a pencil of rays of the second order.
The converse is also true, as we shall see later, and a
pencil of rays of the second order is also a set of lines
tangent to a conic section.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="82. Generating point-rows lines of the system" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p82" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">82.</hi>  The point-rows <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi> are, themselves, lines of
the system, for to the common point of the two point-rows,
considered as a point of <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi>, must correspond some
point of <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi>, and the line joining these two corresponding
points is clearly <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi> itself. Similarly for the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi>.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="83. Determination of the pencil" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p83" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">83. Determination of the pencil.</hi>  We now show that
<hi rend="font-style: italic">it is possible to assign arbitrarily three lines, <hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">c</hi>, of
<pb n="50" /><anchor id="Pg50" />
the system (besides the lines <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi>); but if these three
lines are chosen, the system is completely determined.</hi></p>

<p>This statement is equivalent to the following:</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Given three pairs of corresponding points in two projective
point-rows, it is possible to find a point in one
which corresponds to any point of the other.</hi></p>

<p>We proceed, then, to the solution of the fundamental</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Problem.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">Given three pairs of points, <hi rend="font-style: italic">AA'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">BB'</hi>, and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">CC'</hi>, of two projective point-rows <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi>, to find the point
<hi rend="font-style: italic">D'</hi> of <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi> which corresponds to any given point <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> of <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi>.</hi></p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image20.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 20</head>
<figDesc>Figure 20</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>On the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>, joining <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi>, take two points, <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">S'</hi>, as centers of pencils perspective to <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi>
respectively (Fig. 20). The figure
will be much simplified if we take
<hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> on <hi rend="font-style: italic">BB'</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">S'</hi> on <hi rend="font-style: italic">CC'</hi>. <hi rend="font-style: italic">SA</hi> and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">S'A'</hi> are corresponding rays of <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">S'</hi>, and the two pencils are
therefore in perspective position.
It is not difficult to see that the
axis of perspectivity <hi rend="font-style: italic">m</hi> is the line
joining <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>. Given any point
<hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> on <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi>, to find the corresponding
point <hi rend="font-style: italic">D'</hi> on <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi> we proceed as
follows: Join <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> to <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> and note
where the joining line meets <hi rend="font-style: italic">m</hi>. Join this point to <hi rend="font-style: italic">S'</hi>.
This last line meets <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi> in the desired point <hi rend="font-style: italic">D'</hi>.</p>

<p>We have now in this figure six lines of the system,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">c</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">d</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi>. Fix now the position of <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">c</hi>, and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">d</hi>, and take four lines of the system, <hi rend="font-style: italic">a<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">1</hi></hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">a<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">2</hi></hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">a<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">3</hi></hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">a<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">4</hi></hi>, which
meet <hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi> in four harmonic points. These points project to
<pb n="51" /><anchor id="Pg51" />
<hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>, giving four harmonic points on <hi rend="font-style: italic">m</hi>. These again project
to <hi rend="font-style: italic">D'</hi>, giving four harmonic points on <hi rend="font-style: italic">c</hi>. It is thus clear
that the rays <hi rend="font-style: italic">a<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">1</hi></hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">a<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">2</hi></hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">a<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">3</hi></hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">a<hi rend="vertical-align: sub">4</hi></hi> cut out two projective point-rows
on any two lines of the system. Thus <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi> are
not special rays, and any two rays of the system will
serve as the point-rows to generate the system of lines.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="84. Brianchon's theorem" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p84" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">84. Brianchon's theorem.</hi>  From the figure also appears
a fundamental theorem due to Brianchon:</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">If <hi rend="font-style: italic">1</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">2</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">3</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">4</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">5</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">6</hi> are any six rays of a pencil of the
second order, then the lines <hi rend="font-style: italic">l = (12, 45)</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">m = (23, 56)</hi>,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">n = (34, 61)</hi> all pass through a point.</hi></p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image21.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 21</head>
<figDesc>Figure 21</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="85. Permutations of lines in Brianchon's theorem" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p85" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">85.</hi>  To make the notation fit the figure (Fig. 21), make
<hi rend="font-style: italic">a=1</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">b = 2</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">u' = 3</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">d = 4</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">u = 5</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">c = 6</hi>; or, interchanging
two of the lines, <hi rend="font-style: italic">a = 1</hi>,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">c = 2</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">u = 3</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">d = 4</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">u' = 5</hi>,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">b = 6</hi>. Thus, by different
namings of the
lines, it appears that
not more than 60 different
<hi rend="font-style: italic">Brianchon points</hi>
are possible. If we
call 12 and 45 opposite
vertices of a circumscribed
hexagon,
then Brianchon's theorem may be stated as follows:</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">The three lines joining the three pairs of opposite vertices
of a hexagon circumscribed about a conic meet in a point.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="86. Construction of the penvil by Brianchon's theorem" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p86" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">86. Construction of the pencil by Brianchon's theorem.</hi>
Brianchon's theorem furnishes a ready method of determining
a sixth line of the pencil of rays of the second
<pb n="52" /><anchor id="Pg52" />
order when five are given. Thus, select a point in line
1 and suppose that line 6 is to pass through it. Then
<hi rend="font-style: italic">l = (12, 45)</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">n = (34, 61)</hi>, and the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">m = (23, 56)</hi> must
pass through <hi rend="font-style: italic">(l, n)</hi>. Then <hi rend="font-style: italic">(23, ln)</hi> meets 5 in a point of
the required sixth line.</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image22.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 22</head>
<figDesc>Figure 22</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="87. Point of contact
of a tangent to a conic" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p87" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">87. Point of contact
of a tangent to a conic.</hi>
If the line 2 approach
as a limiting position the
line 1, then the intersection
<hi rend="font-style: italic">(1, 2)</hi> approaches
as a limiting position
the point of contact of
1 with the conic. This suggests an easy way to construct
the point of contact of any tangent with the conic.
Thus (Fig. 22), given the lines 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 to construct
the point of contact of <hi rend="font-style: italic">1=6</hi>.
Draw <hi rend="font-style: italic">l = (12,45)</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">m =(23,56)</hi>;
then <hi rend="font-style: italic">(34, lm)</hi> meets 1 in the
required point of contact <hi rend="font-style: italic">T</hi>.</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image23.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 23</head>
<figDesc>Figure 23</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="88. Circumscribed quadrilateral" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p88" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">88. Circumscribed quadrilateral.</hi>
If two pairs of lines in
Brianchon's hexagon coalesce,
we have a theorem concerning
a quadrilateral circumscribed
about a conic. It is
easily found to be (Fig. 23)</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">The four lines joining the two opposite pairs of vertices
and the two opposite points of contact of a quadrilateral
circumscribed about a conic all meet in a point.</hi> The
consequences of this theorem will be deduced later.</p>

<pb n="53" /><anchor id="Pg53" />

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image24.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 24</head>
<figDesc>Figure 24</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="89. Circumscribed triangle" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p89" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">89. Circumscribed triangle.</hi>  The hexagon may further
degenerate into a triangle, giving the theorem (Fig. 24)
<hi rend="font-style: italic">The lines joining the vertices to
the points of contact of the opposite
sides of a triangle circumscribed
about a conic all meet in a point.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="90. Use of Brianchon's theorem" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p90" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">90.</hi>  Brianchon's theorem may
also be used to solve the following
problems:</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Given four tangents and the point
of contact on any one of them, to construct other tangents to
a conic. Given three tangents and the points of contact of
any two of them, to construct other tangents to a conic.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="91. Harmonic tangents" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p91" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">91. Harmonic tangents.</hi>  We have seen that a variable
tangent cuts out on any two fixed tangents projective
point-rows. It follows that if four tangents cut a fifth
in four harmonic points, they must cut every tangent in
four harmonic points. It is possible, therefore, to make
the following definition:</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Four tangents to a conic are said to be harmonic when
they meet every other tangent in four harmonic points.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="92. Projectivity and perspectivity" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p92" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">92. Projectivity and perspectivity.</hi>  This definition suggests
the possibility of defining a projective correspondence
between the elements of a pencil of rays of the
second order and the elements of any form heretofore
discussed. In particular, the points on a tangent are
said to be <hi rend="font-style: italic">perspectively related</hi> to the tangents of a conic
when each point lies on the tangent which corresponds
to it. These notions are of importance in the higher
developments of the subject.</p>

<pb n="54" /><anchor id="Pg54" />

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image25.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 25</head>
<figDesc>Figure 25</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="93. Degenerate case" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p93" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">93.</hi>  Brianchon's theorem may also be applied to a
degenerate conic made up of two points and the lines
through them. Thus(Fig. 25),</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">If <hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">c</hi> are three lines
through a point <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">a'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">b'</hi>,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">c'</hi> are three lines through another
point <hi rend="font-style: italic">S'</hi>, then the lines
<hi rend="font-style: italic">l = (ab', a'b)</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">m = (bc', b'c)</hi>,
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">n = (ca', c'a)</hi> all meet in
a point.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="94. Law of duality" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p94" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">94. Law of duality.</hi>  The
observant student will not
have failed to note the remarkable
similarity between the theorems of this chapter
and those of the preceding. He will have noted
that points have replaced lines and lines have replaced
points; that points on a curve have been replaced by
tangents to a curve; that pencils have been replaced
by point-rows, and that a conic considered as made up
of a succession of points has been replaced by a conic
considered as generated by a moving tangent line. The
theory upon which this wonderful <hi rend="font-style: italic">law of duality</hi> is based
will be developed in the next chapter.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<head>PROBLEMS</head>

<p>1. Given four lines in the plane, to construct another
which shall meet them in four harmonic points.</p>

<p>2. Where are all such lines found?</p>

<p>3. Given any five lines in the plane, construct on each
the point of contact with the conic tangent to them all.</p>

<pb n="55" /><anchor id="Pg55" />

<p>4. Given four lines and the point of contact on one, to
construct the conic. ("To construct the conic" means here
to draw as many other tangents as may be desired.)</p>

<p>5. Given three lines and the point of contact on two of
them, to construct the conic.</p>

<p>6. Given four lines and the line at infinity, to construct
the conic.</p>

<p>7. Given three lines and the line at infinity, together
with the point of contact at infinity, to construct the conic.</p>

<p>8. Given three lines, two of which are asymptotes, to
construct the conic.</p>

<p>9. Given five tangents to a conic, to draw a tangent
which shall be parallel to any one of them.</p>

<p>10. The lines <hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">c</hi> are drawn parallel to each other.
The lines <hi rend="font-style: italic">a'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">b'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">c'</hi> are also drawn parallel to each other.
Show why the lines (<hi rend="font-style: italic">ab'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">a'b</hi>), (<hi rend="font-style: italic">bc'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">b'c</hi>), (<hi rend="font-style: italic">ca'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">c'a</hi>) meet in a
point. (In problems 6 to 10 inclusive, parallel lines are to
be drawn.)</p>
</div>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="56" /><anchor id="Pg56" />
<head>CHAPTER VI - POLES AND POLARS</head>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="95. Inscribed and circumscribed quadrilaterals" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p95" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">95. Inscribed and circumscribed quadrilaterals.</hi>  The
following theorems have been noted as special cases of
Pascal's and Brianchon's theorems:</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">If a quadrilateral be inscribed in a conic, two pairs of
opposite sides and the tangents at opposite vertices intersect
in four points, all of which lie on a straight line.</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">If a quadrilateral be circumscribed about a conic, the
lines joining two pairs of opposite vertices and the lines
joining two opposite points of contact are four lines which
meet in a point.</hi></p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image26.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 26</head>
<figDesc>Figure 26</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="96. Definition of the polar line of a point" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p96" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">96. Definition of the polar line of a point.</hi>  Consider
the quadrilateral <hi rend="font-style: italic">K</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi> inscribed in the conic
(Fig. 26). It
determines the
four harmonic
points <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> which project
from <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi> in to
the four harmonic
points <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">K</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi>. Now
the tangents at <hi rend="font-style: italic">K</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> meet in <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>, a point on the
line <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi>. The line <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi> is thus determined entirely by
<pb n="57" /><anchor id="Pg57" />
the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi>. For if we draw any line through it, meeting
the conic in <hi rend="font-style: italic">K</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>, and construct the harmonic
conjugate <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> of <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi> with respect to <hi rend="font-style: italic">K</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>, and also
the two tangents at <hi rend="font-style: italic">K</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> which meet in the point
<hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>, then <hi rend="font-style: italic">BP</hi> is the line in question. It thus appears
that the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">LON</hi> may be any line whatever through <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi>;
and since <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi> are four harmonic points, we
may describe the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi> as the locus of points which
are harmonic conjugates of <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi> with respect to the two
points where any line through <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi> meets the curve.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="97. Further defining properties" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p97" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">97.</hi>  Furthermore, since the tangents at <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi> meet
on this same line, it appears as the locus of intersections
of pairs of tangents drawn at the extremities of chords
through <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi>.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="98. Definition of the pole of a line" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p98" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">98.</hi>  This important line, which is completely determined
by the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi>, is called the <hi rend="font-style: italic">polar</hi> of <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi> with
respect to the conic; and the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi> is called the <hi rend="font-style: italic">pole</hi>
of the line with respect to the conic.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="99. Fundamental theorem of poles and polars" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p99" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">99.</hi>  If a point <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> is on the polar of <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi>, then it is harmonically
conjugate to <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi> with respect to the two intersections
<hi rend="font-style: italic">K</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> of the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">BC</hi> with the conic. But
for the same reason <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi> is on the polar of <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>. We have,
then, the fundamental theorem</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">If one point lies on the polar of a second, then the
second lies on the polar of the first.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="100. Conjugate points and lines" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p100" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">100. Conjugate points and lines.</hi>  Such a pair of points
are said to be <hi rend="font-style: italic">conjugate</hi>  with respect to the conic. Similarly,
lines are said to be <hi rend="font-style: italic">conjugate</hi>  to each other with
respect to the conic if one, and consequently each,
passes through the pole of the other.</p>

<pb n="58" /><anchor id="Pg58" />

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image27.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 27</head>
<figDesc>Figure 27</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="101. Construction of the polar line of a given point" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p101" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">101. Construction of the polar line of a given point.</hi>
Given a point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>, if it is within the conic (that is, if no
tangents may be drawn from <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> to the
conic), we may construct its polar line
by drawing through it any two chords
and joining the two points of intersection
of the two pairs of tangents
at their extremities. If the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> is
outside the conic, we may draw the two tangents and
construct the chord of contact (Fig. 27).</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="102. Self-polar triangle" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p102" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">102. Self-polar triangle.</hi>  In Fig. 26 it is not difficult
to see that <hi rend="font-style: italic">AOC</hi> is a <hi rend="font-style: italic">self-polar</hi> triangle, that is, each
vertex is the pole of the opposite side. For <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">K</hi>
are four harmonic points, and they project to <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> in four
harmonic rays. The line <hi rend="font-style: italic">CO</hi>, therefore, meets the line
<hi rend="font-style: italic">AMN</hi> in a point on the polar of <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, being separated from
<hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> harmonically by the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi>. Similarly, the
line <hi rend="font-style: italic">CO</hi> meets <hi rend="font-style: italic">KL</hi> in a point on the polar of <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, and
therefore <hi rend="font-style: italic">CO</hi> is the polar of <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>. Similarly, <hi rend="font-style: italic">OA</hi> is the
polar of <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, and therefore <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi> is the pole of <hi rend="font-style: italic">AC</hi>.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="103. Pole and polar projectively related" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p103" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">103. Pole and polar projectively related.</hi>  Another very
important theorem comes directly from Fig. 26.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">As a point <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> moves along a straight line its polar with
respect to a conic revolves about a fixed point and describes
a pencil projective to the point-row described by <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>.</hi></p>

<p>For, fix the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi> and let the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> move
along the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">AQ</hi>; then the point-row <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> is projective
to the pencil <hi rend="font-style: italic">LK</hi>, and since <hi rend="font-style: italic">K</hi> moves along the conic,
the pencil <hi rend="font-style: italic">LK</hi> is projective to the pencil <hi rend="font-style: italic">NK</hi>, which in
turn is projective to the point-row <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, which, finally, is
projective to the pencil <hi rend="font-style: italic">OC</hi>, which is the polar of <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>.</p>

<pb n="59" /><anchor id="Pg59" /></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="104. Duality" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p104" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">104. Duality.</hi>  We have, then, in the pole and polar
relation a device for setting up a one-to-one correspondence
between the points and lines of the plane&mdash;a correspondence
which may be called projective, because to
four harmonic points or lines correspond always four
harmonic lines or points. To every figure made up of
points and lines will correspond a figure made up of
lines and points. To a point-row of the second order,
which is a conic considered as a point-locus, corresponds
a pencil of rays of the second order, which is a conic
considered as a line-locus. The name 'duality' is used
to describe this sort of correspondence. It is important
to note that the dual relation is subject to the same
exceptions as the one-to-one correspondence is, and
must not be appealed to in cases where the one-to-one
correspondence breaks down. We have seen that there
is in Euclidean geometry one and only one ray in a
pencil which has no point in a point-row perspective to
it for a corresponding point; namely, the line parallel
to the line of the point-row. Any theorem, therefore,
that involves explicitly the point at infinity is not to
be translated into a theorem concerning lines. Further,
in the pencil the angle between two lines has nothing
to correspond to it in a point-row perspective to the
pencil. Any theorem, therefore, that mentions angles is
not translatable into another theorem by means of the
law of duality. Now we have seen that the notion of
the infinitely distant point on a line involves the notion
of dividing a segment into any number of equal parts&mdash;in
other words, of <hi rend="font-style: italic">measuring</hi>. If, therefore, we call any
theorem that has to do with the line at infinity or with
<pb n="60" /><anchor id="Pg60" />
the measurement of angles a <hi rend="font-style: italic">metrical</hi> theorem, and any
other kind a <hi rend="font-style: italic">projective</hi> theorem, we may put the case
as follows:</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Any projective theorem involves another theorem, dual to
it, obtainable by interchanging everywhere the words 'point'
and 'line.'</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="105. Self-dual theorems" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p105" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">105. Self-dual theorems.</hi>  The theorems of this chapter
will be found, upon examination, to be <hi rend="font-style: italic">self-dual</hi>;
that is, no new theorem results from applying the
process indicated in the preceding paragraph. It is
therefore useless to look for new results from the theorem
on the circumscribed quadrilateral derived from
Brianchon's, which is itself clearly the dual of Pascal's
theorem, and in fact was first discovered by dualization
of Pascal's.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="106. Other correspondences" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p106" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">106.</hi>  It should not be inferred from the above discussion
that one-to-one correspondences may not be devised
that will control certain of the so-called metrical relations.
A very important one may be easily found that
leaves angles unaltered. The relation called <hi rend="font-style: italic">similarity</hi>
leaves ratios between corresponding segments unaltered.
The above statements apply only to the particular one-to-one
correspondence considered.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<head>PROBLEMS</head>

<p>1. Given a quadrilateral, construct the quadrangle polar
to it with respect to a given conic.</p>

<p>2. A point moves along a straight line. Show that its
polar lines with respect to two given conics generate a
point-row of the second order.</p>

<pb n="61" /><anchor id="Pg61" />

<p>3. Given five points, draw the polar of a point with respect
to the conic passing through them, without drawing
the conic itself.</p>

<p>4. Given five lines, draw the polar of a point with respect
to the conic tangent to them, without drawing the
conic itself.</p>

<p>5. Dualize problems 3 and 4.</p>

<p>6. Given four points on the conic, and the tangent at one
of them, draw the polar of a given point without drawing
the conic. Dualize.</p>

<p>7. A point moves on a conic. Show that its polar line
with respect to another conic describes a pencil of rays of
the second order.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Suggestion.</hi> Replace the given conic by a pair of protective pencils.</p>

<p>8. Show that the poles of the tangents of one conic with
respect to another lie on a conic.</p>

<p>9. The polar of a point <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> with respect to one conic is <hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>,
and the pole of <hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi> with respect to another conic is <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi>. Show
that as <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> travels along a line, <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi> also travels along another
line. In general, if <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> describes a curve of degree <hi rend="font-style: italic">n</hi>, show
that <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi> describes another curve of the same degree <hi rend="font-style: italic">n</hi>. (The
degree of a curve is the greatest number of points that it
may have in common with any line in the plane.)</p>
</div>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="62" /><anchor id="Pg62" />

<head>CHAPTER VII - METRICAL PROPERTIES OF THE CONIC SECTIONS</head>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="107. Diameters. Center" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p107" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">107. Diameters. Center.</hi>  After what has been said in
the last chapter one would naturally expect to get at
the metrical properties of the conic sections by the
introduction of the infinite elements in the plane. Entering
into the theory of poles and polars with these
elements, we have the following definitions:</p>

<p>The polar line of an infinitely distant point is called
a <hi rend="font-style: italic">diameter</hi>, and the pole of the infinitely distant line is
called the <hi rend="font-style: italic">center</hi>, of the conic.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="108. Various theorems" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p108" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">108.</hi>  From the harmonic properties of poles and polars,</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">The center bisects all chords through it (§ 39).</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Every diameter passes through the center.</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">All chords through the same point at infinity (that is,
each of a set of parallel chords) are bisected by the diameter
which is the polar of that infinitely distant point.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="109. Conjugate diameters" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p109" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">109. Conjugate diameters.</hi>  We have already defined
conjugate lines as lines which pass each through the
pole of the other (§ 100).</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Any diameter bisects all chords parallel to its conjugate.</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">The tangents at the extremities of any diameter are
parallel, and parallel to the conjugate diameter.</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Diameters parallel to the sides of a circumscribed parallelogram
are conjugate.</hi></p>

<p>All these theorems are easy exercises for the student.</p>

<pb n="63" /><anchor id="Pg63" /></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="110. Classification of conics" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p110" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">110. Classification of conics.</hi>  Conics are classified according
to their relation to the infinitely distant line.
If a conic has two points in common with the line at
infinity, it is called a <hi rend="font-style: italic">hyperbola</hi>; if it has no point in
common with the infinitely distant line, it is called an
<hi rend="font-style: italic">ellipse</hi>; if it is tangent to the line at infinity, it is called
a <hi rend="font-style: italic">parabola</hi>.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="111. Asymptotes" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p111" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">111.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">In a hyperbola the center is outside the curve</hi>
(§ 101), since the two tangents to the curve at the points
where it meets the line at infinity determine by their
intersection the center. As previously noted, these two
tangents are called the <hi rend="font-style: italic">asymptotes</hi> of the curve. The
ellipse and the parabola have no asymptotes.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="112. Various theorems" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p112" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">112.</hi>  <hi rend="font-style: italic">The center of the parabola is at infinity, and therefore
all its diameters are parallel,</hi> for the pole of a tangent
line is the point of contact.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">The locus of the middle points of a series of parallel
chords in a parabola is a diameter, and the direction of
the line of centers is the same for all series of parallel
chords.</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">The center of an ellipse is within the curve.</hi></p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image28.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 28</head>
<figDesc>Figure 28</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="113. Theorems concerning asymptotes" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p113" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">113. Theorems concerning asymptotes.</hi>  We derived as
a consequence of the theorem of Brianchon (§ 89) the
proposition that if a triangle be circumscribed about
a conic, the lines joining the vertices to the points
of contact of the opposite sides all meet in a point.
Take, now, for two of the tangents the asymptotes of
a hyperbola, and let any third tangent cut them in <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> (Fig. 28). If, then, <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi> is the intersection of the
asymptotes,&mdash;and therefore the center of the curve,&mdash;
<pb n="64" /><anchor id="Pg64" />
then the triangle <hi rend="font-style: italic">OAB</hi> is circumscribed about the curve.
By the theorem just quoted, the line through <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> parallel
to <hi rend="font-style: italic">OB</hi>, the line through <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> parallel to <hi rend="font-style: italic">OA</hi>, and the
line <hi rend="font-style: italic">OP</hi> through the point of
contact of the tangent <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi>
all meet in a point <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>. But
<hi rend="font-style: italic">OACB</hi> is a parallelogram, and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">PA = PB</hi>. Therefore</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">The asymptotes cut off on
each tangent a segment which is
bisected by the point of contact.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="114. Asymptotes and conjugate diameters" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p114" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">114.</hi>  If we draw a line <hi rend="font-style: italic">OQ</hi>
parallel to <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi>, then <hi rend="font-style: italic">OP</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">OQ</hi> are conjugate diameters,
since <hi rend="font-style: italic">OQ</hi> is parallel to the tangent at the point
where <hi rend="font-style: italic">OP</hi> meets the curve. Then, since <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, and
the point at infinity on <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi> are four harmonic points,
we have the theorem</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Conjugate diameters of the hyperbola are harmonic
conjugates with respect to the asymptotes.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="115. Segments cut off on a chord by hyperbola and its asymptotes" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p115" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">115.</hi>  The chord <hi rend="font-style: italic">A"B"</hi>, parallel to the diameter <hi rend="font-style: italic">OQ</hi>, is
bisected at <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi> by the conjugate diameter <hi rend="font-style: italic">OP</hi>. If the
chord <hi rend="font-style: italic">A"B"</hi> meet the asymptotes in <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi>, then <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi>,
and the point at infinity are four harmonic points, and
therefore <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi> is the middle point of <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'B'</hi>. Therefore
<hi rend="font-style: italic">A'A" = B'B"</hi> and we have the theorem</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">The segments cut off on any chord between the hyperbola
and its asymptotes are equal.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="116. Application of the theorem" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p116" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">116.</hi>  This theorem furnishes a ready means of constructing
the hyperbola by points when a point on the
curve and the two asymptotes are given.</p>

<pb n="65" /><anchor id="Pg65" />

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image29.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 29</head>
<figDesc>Figure 29</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="117. Triangle formed by the two asymptotes and a tangent" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p117" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">117.</hi>  For the circumscribed quadrilateral, Brianchon's
theorem gave (§ 88) <hi rend="font-style: italic">The lines joining opposite vertices
and the lines joining opposite points of contact are four
lines meeting in a point.</hi> Take now for two of the
tangents the asymptotes, and let <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">CD</hi> be any
other two (Fig. 29).
If <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> are opposite
vertices, and
also <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, then
<hi rend="font-style: italic">AC</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">BD</hi> are parallel,
and parallel to
<hi rend="font-style: italic">PQ</hi>, the line joining
the points of contact
of <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">CD</hi>,
for these are three of
the four lines of the
theorem just quoted. The fourth is the line at infinity
which joins the point of contact of the asymptotes. It
is thus seen that the triangles <hi rend="font-style: italic">ABC</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">ADC</hi> are
equivalent, and therefore the triangles <hi rend="font-style: italic">AOB</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">COD</hi>
are also. The tangent AB may be fixed, and the tangent
<hi rend="font-style: italic">CD</hi> chosen arbitrarily; therefore</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">The triangle formed by any tangent to the hyperbola
and the two asymptotes is of constant area.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="118. Equation of hyperbola referred to the asymptotes" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p118" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">118. Equation of hyperbola referred to the asymptotes.</hi>
Draw through the point of contact <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> of the tangent
<hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi> two lines, one parallel to one asymptote and the
other parallel to the other. One of these lines meets
<hi rend="font-style: italic">OB</hi> at a distance <hi rend="font-style: italic">y</hi> from <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi>, and the other meets <hi rend="font-style: italic">OA</hi> at
a distance <hi rend="font-style: italic">x</hi> from <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi>. Then, since <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> is the middle point
<pb n="66" /><anchor id="Pg66" />
of <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">x</hi> is one half of <hi rend="font-style: italic">OA</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">y</hi> is one half of <hi rend="font-style: italic">OB</hi>.
The area of the parallelogram whose adjacent sides are
<hi rend="font-style: italic">x</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">y</hi> is one half the area of the triangle <hi rend="font-style: italic">AOB</hi>, and
therefore, by the preceding paragraph, is constant. This
area is equal to <hi rend="font-style: italic">xy · <hi rend="font-style: normal">sin</hi> α</hi>, where α is the constant angle
between the asymptotes. It follows that the product <hi rend="font-style: italic">xy</hi>
is constant, and since <hi rend="font-style: italic">x</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">y</hi> are the oblique coördinates
of the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>, the asymptotes being the axes
of reference, we have</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">The equation of the hyperbola, referred to the asymptotes
as axes, is <hi rend="font-style: italic">xy =</hi> constant.</hi></p>

<p>This identifies the curve with the hyperbola as defined
and discussed in works on analytic geometry.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="119. Equation of parabola" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image30.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 30</head>
<figDesc>Figure 30</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p><anchor id="p119" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">119. Equation of
parabola.</hi> We have
defined the parabola
as a conic which is
tangent to the line
at infinity (§ 110).
Draw now two tangents
to the curve
(Fig. 30), meeting in
<hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, the points of contact
being <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>.
These two tangents,
together with the
line at infinity, form
a triangle circumscribed
about the
conic. Draw through <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> a parallel to <hi rend="font-style: italic">AC</hi>, and through
<hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> a parallel to <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi>. If these meet in <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>, then <hi rend="font-style: italic">AD</hi> is a
<pb n="67" /><anchor id="Pg67" />
diameter. Let <hi rend="font-style: italic">AD</hi> meet the curve in <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>, and the chord
<hi rend="font-style: italic">BC</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">Q</hi>. <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> is then the middle point of <hi rend="font-style: italic">AQ</hi>. Also, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Q</hi>
is the middle point of the chord <hi rend="font-style: italic">BC</hi>, and therefore the
diameter <hi rend="font-style: italic">AD</hi> bisects all chords parallel to <hi rend="font-style: italic">BC</hi>. In particular,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">AD</hi> passes through <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>, the point of contact of
the tangent drawn parallel to <hi rend="font-style: italic">BC</hi>.</p>

<p>Draw now another tangent, meeting <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">AC</hi>
in <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi>. Then these three, with the line at infinity, make
a circumscribed quadrilateral. But, by Brianchon's theorem
applied to a quadrilateral (§ 88), it appears that a
parallel to <hi rend="font-style: italic">AC</hi> through <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi>, a parallel to <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi> through <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi>,
and the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">BC</hi> meet in a point <hi rend="font-style: italic">D'</hi>. Also, from the similar
triangles <hi rend="font-style: italic">BB'D'</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">BAC</hi> we have, for all positions of the
tangent line <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'C</hi>,</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">B'D' : BB' = AC : AB,</hi>
</p>

<p>or, since <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'D' = AC'</hi>,</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">AC': BB' = AC:AB =</hi> constant.
</p>

<p>If another tangent meet <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">B"</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">AC</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">C"</hi>, we have</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">
AC' : BB' = AC" : BB",
</hi></p>

<p>and by subtraction we get</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">C'C" : B'B" =</hi> constant;
</p>

<p>whence</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">The segments cut off on any two tangents to a parabola
by a variable tangent are proportional.</hi></p>

<p>If now we take the tangent <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'C'</hi> as axis of ordinates,
and the diameter through the point of contact <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi> as axis
of abscissas, calling the coordinates of <hi rend="font-style: italic">B(x, y)</hi> and of
<hi rend="font-style: italic">C(x', y')</hi>, then, from the similar triangles <hi rend="font-style: italic">BMD'</hi> and
we have</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">y : y' = BD' : D'C = BB' : AB'.</hi>
</p>

<p>Also</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">y : y' = B'D' : C'C = AC' : C'C.</hi>
</p>

<pb n="68" /><anchor id="Pg68" />

<p>If now a line is drawn through <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> parallel to a diameter,
meeting the axis of ordinates in <hi rend="font-style: italic">K</hi>, we have</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">AK : OQ' = AC' : CC' = y : y',</hi>
</p>

<p>and</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">OM : AK = BB' : AB' = y : y',</hi>
</p>

<p>and, by multiplication,</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">OM : OQ' = y<hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi> : y'<hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi>,</hi>
</p>

<p>or</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">x : x' = y<hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi> : y'<hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi>;</hi>
</p>

<p>whence</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">The abscissas of two points on a parabola are to each
other as the squares of the corresponding coördinates, a
diameter and the tangent to the curve at the extremity of
the diameter being the axes of reference.</hi></p>

<p>The last equation may be written</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">y<hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi> = 2px,</hi>
</p>

<p>where <hi rend="font-style: italic">2p</hi> stands for <hi rend="font-style: italic">y'<hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi> : x'</hi>.</p>

<p>The parabola is thus identified with the curve of the
same name studied in treatises on analytic geometry.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="120. Equation of central conics referred to conjugate
diameters" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p120" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">120. Equation of central conics referred to conjugate
diameters.</hi> Consider now a <hi rend="font-style: italic">central conic</hi>, that is, one
which is not a parabola and the center of which is
therefore at a finite distance. Draw any four tangents
to it, two of which are parallel (Fig. 31). Let the
parallel tangents meet one of the other tangents in <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> and the other in <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>, and let <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">Q</hi> be
the points of contact of the parallel tangents <hi rend="font-style: italic">R</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>
of the others. Then <hi rend="font-style: italic">AC</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">BD</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">PQ</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">RS</hi> all meet in
a point <hi rend="font-style: italic">W</hi> (§ 88). From the figure,</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">PW : WQ = AP : QC = PD : BQ,</hi>
</p>

<p>or</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">AP · BQ = PD · QC.</hi>
</p>

<pb n="69" /><anchor id="Pg69" />

<p>If now <hi rend="font-style: italic">DC</hi> is a fixed tangent and <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi> a variable one,
we have from this equation</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">AP · BQ = <hi rend="font-style: normal">constant.</hi></hi>
</p>

<p>This constant will be positive or negative according as
<hi rend="font-style: italic">PA</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">BQ</hi> are measured in the same or in opposite
directions. Accordingly we write</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">AP · BQ = ± b<hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi>.</hi>
</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image31.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 31</head>
<figDesc>Figure 31</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>Since <hi rend="font-style: italic">AD</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">BC</hi> are parallel tangents, <hi rend="font-style: italic">PQ</hi> is a diameter
and the conjugate diameter is parallel to <hi rend="font-style: italic">AD</hi>. The
middle point of <hi rend="font-style: italic">PQ</hi> is the
center of the conic. We take
now for the axis of abscissas
the diameter <hi rend="font-style: italic">PQ</hi>, and the
conjugate diameter for the
axis of ordinates. Join <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> to
<hi rend="font-style: italic">Q</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> to <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> and draw a
line through <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> parallel to
the axis of ordinates. These
three lines all meet in a point
<hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi>, because <hi rend="font-style: italic">AP</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">BQ</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi>
form a triangle circumscribed
to the conic. Let <hi rend="font-style: italic">NS</hi> meet
<hi rend="font-style: italic">PQ</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>. Then, from the properties of the circumscribed
triangle (§ 89), <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>, and the point at infinity
on <hi rend="font-style: italic">NS</hi> are four harmonic points, and therefore <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi> is the
middle point of <hi rend="font-style: italic">MS</hi>. If the coördinates of <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> are <hi rend="font-style: italic">(x, y)</hi>,
so that <hi rend="font-style: italic">OM</hi> is <hi rend="font-style: italic">x</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">MS</hi> is <hi rend="font-style: italic">y</hi>, then <hi rend="font-style: italic">MN = y/2</hi>. Now
from the similar triangles <hi rend="font-style: italic">PMN</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">PQB</hi> we have</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">BQ : PQ = NM : PM,</hi>
</p>

<pb n="70" /><anchor id="Pg70" />

<p>and from the similar triangles <hi rend="font-style: italic">PQA</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">MQN</hi>,</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">AP : PQ = MN : MQ,</hi>
</p>

<p>whence, multiplying, we have</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">±b<hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi>/4 a<hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi> = y<hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi>/4 (a + x)(a - x),</hi>
</p>

<p>where</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<formula notation="tex">
\[
a=\frac{PQ}{2},
\]
</formula>
</p>

<p>or, simplifying,</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<formula notation="tex">
\[
x^2/a^2 + y^2/\pm b^2 = 1,
\]
</formula>
</p>

<p>which is the equation of an ellipse when <hi rend="font-style: italic">b<hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi></hi> has a positive
sign, and of a hyperbola when <hi rend="font-style: italic">b<hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi></hi> has a negative
sign. We have thus identified point-rows of the second
order with the curves given by equations of the second
degree.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<head>PROBLEMS</head>

<p>1. Draw a chord of a given conic which shall be bisected
by a given point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>.</p>

<p>2. Show that all chords of a given conic that are bisected
by a given chord are tangent to a parabola.</p>

<p>3. Construct a parabola, given two tangents with their
points of contact.</p>

<p>4. Construct a parabola, given three points and the direction
of the diameters.</p>

<p>5. A line <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi> is drawn through the pole <hi rend="font-style: italic">U</hi> of a line <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> and
at right angles to <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi>. The line <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> revolves about a point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>.
Show that the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi> is tangent to a parabola. (The lines <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi>
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">u'</hi> are called normal conjugates.)</p>

<p>6. Given a circle and its center <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi>, to draw a line through
a given point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> parallel to a given line <hi rend="font-style: italic">q</hi>. Prove the following
construction: Let <hi rend="font-style: italic">p</hi> be the polar of <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Q</hi> the pole of
<hi rend="font-style: italic">q</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> the intersection of <hi rend="font-style: italic">p</hi> with <hi rend="font-style: italic">OQ</hi>. The polar of <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> is
the desired line.</p>
</div>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n="71" /><anchor id="Pg71" />
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER VIII - INVOLUTION</head>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="121. Fundamental theorem" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image32.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 32</head>
<figDesc>Figure 32</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p><anchor id="p121" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">121. Fundamental theorem.</hi>  The important theorem
concerning two complete quadrangles (§ 26), upon which
the theory of four harmonic points was based, can easily
be extended to
the case where
the four lines
<hi rend="font-style: italic">KL</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">K'L'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">MN</hi>,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">M'N'</hi> do not
all meet in the
same point <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>,
and the more
general theorem
that results
may also
be made the basis of a theory no less important, which has
to do with six points on a line. The theorem is as follows:</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Given two complete quadrangles, <hi rend="font-style: italic">K</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi> and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">K'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">L'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">M'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">N'</hi>, so related that <hi rend="font-style: italic">KL</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">K'L'</hi> meet in <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">MN</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">M'N'</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">KN</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">K'N'</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">LM</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">L'M'</hi>
in <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">LN</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">L'N'</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">KM</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">K'M'</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi>, then,
if <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> are in a straight line, the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi>
also lies on that straight line.</hi></p>

<p>The theorem follows from Desargues's theorem
(Fig. 32). It is seen that <hi rend="font-style: italic">KK'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">LL'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">MM'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">NN'</hi> all
<pb n="72" /><anchor id="Pg72" />
meet in a point, and thus, from the same theorem, applied
to the triangles <hi rend="font-style: italic">KLM</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">K'L'M'</hi>, the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi> is on
the same line with <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi>. As in the simpler case, it
is seen that there is an indefinite number of quadrangles
which may be drawn, two sides of which go through
<hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi>, two through <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi>, and one through <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>.
The sixth side must then go through <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi>. Therefore,</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="122. Linear construction" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p122" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">122.</hi>  <hi rend="font-style: italic">Two pairs of points, <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi>, being given,
then the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi> corresponding to any given point <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> is
uniquely determined.</hi></p>

<p>The construction of this sixth point is easily accomplished.
Draw through <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi> any two lines, and
cut across them by any line through <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> in the points
<hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi>. Join <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi> to <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi> to <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi>, thus determining
the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">K</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> on the two lines through <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi>,
The line <hi rend="font-style: italic">KM</hi> determines the desired point <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi>. Manifestly,
starting from <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi>, we come in this way always to the
same point <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>. The particular quadrangle employed is
of no consequence. Moreover, since one pair of opposite
sides in a complete quadrangle is not distinguishable
in any way from any other, the same set of six points
will be obtained by starting from the pairs <hi rend="font-style: italic">AA'</hi> and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">CC'</hi>, or from the pairs <hi rend="font-style: italic">BB'</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">CC'</hi>.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="123. Definition of involution of points on a line" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p123" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">123. Definition of involution of points on a line.</hi></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Three pairs of points on a line are said to be in involution
if through each pair may be drawn a pair of opposite
sides of a complete quadrangle. If two pairs are fixed and
one of the third pair describes the line, then the other also
describes the line, and the points of the line are said to be
paired in the involution determined by the two fixed pairs.</hi></p>

<pb n="73" /><anchor id="Pg73" />

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image33.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 33</head>
<figDesc>Figure 33</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="124. Double-points in an involution" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p124" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">124. Double-points in an involution.</hi>  The points <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi> describe projective point-rows, as may be seen by fixing
the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>. The self-corresponding points, of
which there are two or none, are called the <hi rend="font-style: italic">double-points</hi> in
the involution. It is not difficult to see that the double-points
in the involution are harmonic conjugates with
respect to corresponding points in the involution. For,
fixing as before the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>, let the intersection
of the lines <hi rend="font-style: italic">CL</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'M</hi> be <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> (Fig. 33). The locus of <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> is
a conic which goes through the double-points, because the
point-rows <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi> are projective,
and therefore so
are the pencils
<hi rend="font-style: italic">LC</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">MC'</hi>
which generate
the locus of <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>.
Also, when <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi> fall together,
the point
<hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> coincides with
them. Further, the tangents at <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> to this conic
described by <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> are the lines <hi rend="font-style: italic">LB</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">MB</hi>. For in the
pencil at <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi> the ray <hi rend="font-style: italic">LM</hi> common to the two pencils which
generate the conic is the ray <hi rend="font-style: italic">LB'</hi> and corresponds to the
ray <hi rend="font-style: italic">MB</hi> of <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>, which is therefore the tangent line to the
conic at <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>. Similarly for the tangent <hi rend="font-style: italic">LB</hi> at <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi>. <hi rend="font-style: italic">LM</hi> is
therefore the polar of <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> with respect to this conic, and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi> are therefore harmonic conjugates with respect
to the double-points. The same discussion applies to any
other pair of corresponding points in the involution.</p>

<pb n="74" /><anchor id="Pg74" />

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image34.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 34</head>
<figDesc>Figure 34</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="125. Desargues's theorem concerning conics through
four points" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p125" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">125. Desargues's theorem concerning conics through
four points.</hi> Let <hi rend="font-style: italic">DD'</hi> be any pair of points in the involution
determined as above, and consider the conic
passing through the five points <hi rend="font-style: italic">K</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>. We
shall use Pascal's theorem to show that this conic also
passes through <hi rend="font-style: italic">D'</hi>. The point <hi rend="font-style: italic">D'</hi> is determined as follows:
Fix <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> as before (Fig. 34) and join <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> to <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi>,
giving on <hi rend="font-style: italic">MN</hi>
the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">N'</hi>.
Join <hi rend="font-style: italic">N'</hi> to <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>,
giving on <hi rend="font-style: italic">LK</hi>
the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">K'</hi>.
Then <hi rend="font-style: italic">MK'</hi> determines
the
point <hi rend="font-style: italic">D'</hi> on
the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">AA'</hi>,
given by the
complete quadrangle
<hi rend="font-style: italic">K'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">N'</hi>. Consider the following six points,
numbering them in order: <hi rend="font-style: italic">D = 1</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D' = 2</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">M = 3</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">N = 4</hi>,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">K = 5</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">L = 6</hi>. We have the following intersections:
<hi rend="font-style: italic">B = (12-45)</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">K' = (23-56)</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">N' = (34-61)</hi>; and since by
construction <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">K'</hi> are on a straight line, it follows
from the converse of Pascal's theorem, which is
easily established, that the six points are on a conic.
We have, then, the beautiful theorem due to Desargues:</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">The system of conics through four points meets any line
in the plane in pairs of points in involution.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="126. Degenerate conics of the system" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p126" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">126.</hi>  It appears also that the six points in involution
determined by the quadrangle through the four fixed
<pb n="75" /><anchor id="Pg75" />
points belong also to the same involution with the
points cut out by the system of conics, as indeed we
might infer from the fact that the three pairs of opposite
sides of the quadrangle may be considered as
degenerate conics of the system.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="127. Conics through four points touching a given line" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p127" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">127. Conics through four points touching a given line.</hi>
It is further evident that the involution determined on
a line by the system of conics will have a double-point
where a conic of the system is tangent to the line. We
may therefore infer the theorem</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Through four fixed points in the plane two conics or
none may be drawn tangent to any given line.</hi></p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image35.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 35</head>
<figDesc>Figure 35</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="128. Double correspondence" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p128" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">128. Double correspondence.</hi>  We have seen that corresponding
points in an involution form two projective
point-rows superposed on the same straight line. Two
projective point-rows superposed
on the same straight line are, however,
not necessarily in involution,
as a simple example will show.
Take two lines, <hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">a'</hi>, which
both revolve about a fixed point <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>
and which always make the same
angle with each other (Fig. 35).
These lines cut out on any line
in the plane which does not pass
through <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> two projective point-rows,
which are not, however, in
involution unless the angle between the lines is a right
angles. For a point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> may correspond to a point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi>,
which in turn will correspond to some other point
<pb n="76" /><anchor id="Pg76" />
than <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>. The peculiarity of point-rows in involution
is that any point will correspond to the same point,
in whichever point-row it is considered as belonging.
In this case, if a point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> corresponds to a point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi>, then
the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi> corresponds back again to the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>.
The points <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi> are then said to <hi rend="font-style: italic">correspond doubly</hi>.
This notion is worthy of further study.</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image36.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 36</head>
<figDesc>Figure 36</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="129. Steiner's construction" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p129" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">129. Steiner's construction.</hi>  It will be observed that
the solution of the fundamental problem given in § 83,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">Given three pairs of points of two protective point-rows, to
construct other pairs</hi>, cannot be carried out if the two
point-rows lie on the same straight line. Of course the
method may be easily altered to cover that case also,
but it is worth while to give another solution of the
problem, due to Steiner, which will also give further
information regarding the theory of involution, and
which may, indeed, be used as a foundation for that
theory. Let the two point-rows <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>, ... and <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi>,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D'</hi>, ... be superposed on the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi>. Project
them both to a point <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> and pass any conic <hi rend="font-style: italic">κ</hi> through <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>.
We thus obtain two projective pencils, <hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">c</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">d</hi>, ... and
<pb n="77" /><anchor id="Pg77" />
<hi rend="font-style: italic">a'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">b'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">c'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">d'</hi>, ... at <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>, which meet the conic in the points
<hi rend="font-style: italic">α</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">β</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">γ</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">δ</hi>, ... and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">α'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">β'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">γ'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">δ'</hi>, ... (Fig. 36). Take now
<hi rend="font-style: italic">γ</hi> as the center of a pencil projecting the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">α'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">β'</hi>,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">δ'</hi>, ..., and take <hi rend="font-style: italic">γ'</hi> as the center of a pencil projecting
the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">α</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">β</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">δ</hi>, .... These two pencils are projective
to each other, and since they have a self-correspondin
ray in common, they are in perspective position and
corresponding rays meet on the line joining <hi rend="font-style: italic">(γα', γ'α)</hi>
to <hi rend="font-style: italic">(γβ', γ'β)</hi>. The correspondence between points in
the two point-rows on <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> is now easily traced.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="130. Application of Steiner's construction to double
correspondence" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p130" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">130. Application of Steiner's construction to double
correspondence.</hi> Steiner's construction throws into our
hands an important theorem concerning double correspondence:
<hi rend="font-style: italic">If two projective point-rows, superposed on
the same line, have one pair of points which correspond
to each other doubly, then all pairs correspond to each
other doubly, and the line is paired in involution.</hi> To
make this appear, let us call the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> on <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> by two
names, <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi>, according as it is thought of as
belonging to the one or to the other of the two point-rows.
If this point is one of a pair which correspond to
each other doubly, then the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> must coincide
(Fig. 37). Take now any point <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, which we will
also call <hi rend="font-style: italic">R'</hi>. We must show that the corresponding
point <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi> must also coincide with the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>. Join all
the points to <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>, as before, and it appears that the points
α and <hi rend="font-style: italic">π'</hi> coincide, as also do the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">α'π</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">γρ'</hi>.
By the above construction the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">γ'ρ</hi> must meet <hi rend="font-style: italic">γρ'</hi>
on the line joining <hi rend="font-style: italic">(γα', γ'α)</hi> with
<hi rend="font-style: italic">(γπ', γ'π)</hi>. But these
four points form a quadrangle inscribed in the conic,
and we know by § 95 that the tangents at the opposite
<pb n="78" /><anchor id="Pg78" />
vertices <hi rend="font-style: italic">γ</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">γ'</hi> meet on the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">v</hi>. The line <hi rend="font-style: italic">γ'ρ</hi>
is thus a tangent to the conic, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">R</hi> are
the same point. That two projective point-rows superposed
on the same line are also in involution when
one pair, and therefore all pairs, correspond doubly
may be shown by taking <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> at one vertex of a complete
quadrangle which has two pairs of opposite sides going
through two pairs of points. The details we leave to
the student.</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image37.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 37</head>
<figDesc>Figure 37</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image38.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 38</head>
<figDesc>Figure 38</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="131. Involution of points on a point-row of the second order." /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p131" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">131. Involution of points on a point-row of the second
order.</hi> It is important to note also, in Steiner's construction,
that we have obtained two point-rows of the
second order superposed on the same conic, and have
paired the points of one with the points of the other
in such a way that the correspondence is double. We
may then extend the notion of involution to point-rows
of the second order and say that <hi rend="font-style: italic">the points of a conic
are paired in involution when they are corresponding
<pb n="79" /><anchor id="Pg79" />
points of two projective point-rows superposed on the conic,
and when they correspond to each other doubly.</hi> With this
definition we may prove the theorem: <hi rend="font-style: italic">The lines joining
corresponding points of a point-row of the second order in
involution all pass through a fixed point <hi rend="font-style: italic">U</hi>, and the line
joining any two points <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> meets the line joining the
two corresponding points <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi> in the
points of a line <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi>, which is the polar
of <hi rend="font-style: italic">U</hi> with respect to the conic.</hi> For
take <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi> as the centers of two
pencils, the first perspective to the
point-row <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi> and the second
perspective to the point-row <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>.
Then, since the common ray of the
two pencils corresponds to itself, they are in perspective
position, and their axis of perspectivity <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> (Fig. 38)
is the line which joins the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">(AB', A'B)</hi> to the
point <hi rend="font-style: italic">(AC', A'C)</hi>. It is then immediately clear, from
the theory of poles and polars, that <hi rend="font-style: italic">BB'</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">CC'</hi> pass
through the pole <hi rend="font-style: italic">U</hi> of the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi>.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="132. Involution of rays" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p132" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">132. Involution of rays.</hi>  The whole theory thus far
developed may be dualized, and a theory of lines in
involution may be built up, starting with the complete
quadrilateral. Thus,</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">The three pairs of rays which may be drawn from a
point through the three pairs of opposite vertices of a
complete quadrilateral are said to be in involution. If the
pairs <hi rend="font-style: italic">aa'</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">bb'</hi> are fixed, and the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">c</hi> describes a pencil,
the corresponding line <hi rend="font-style: italic">c'</hi> also describes a pencil, and the
rays of the pencil are said to be paired in the involution
determined by <hi rend="font-style: italic">aa'</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">bb'</hi>.</hi></p>

<pb n="80" /><anchor id="Pg80" /></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="133. Double rays" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p133" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">133. Double rays.</hi>  The self-corresponding rays, of
which there are two or none, are called <hi rend="font-style: italic">double rays</hi> of
the involution. Corresponding rays of the involution
are harmonic conjugates with respect to the double
rays. To the theorem of Desargues (§ 125) which has
to do with the system of conics through four points
we have the dual:</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">The tangents from a fixed point to a system of conics tangent
to four fixed lines form a pencil of rays in involution.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="134. Conic through a fixed point touching four lines" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p134" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">134.</hi>  If a conic of the system should go through the
fixed point, it is clear that the two tangents would coincide
and indicate a double ray of the involution. The
theorem, therefore, follows:</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Two conics or none may be drawn through a fixed point
to be tangent to four fixed lines.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="135. Double correspondence" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p135" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">135. Double correspondence.</hi>  It further appears that
two projective pencils of rays which have the same
center are in involution if two pairs of rays correspond
to each other doubly. From this it is clear that we
might have deemed six rays in involution as six rays
which pass through a point and also through six points
in involution. While this would have been entirely in
accord with the treatment which was given the corresponding
problem in the theory of harmonic points and
lines, it is more satisfactory, from an aesthetic point of
view, to build the theory of lines in involution on its own
base. The student can show, by methods entirely analogous
to those used in the second chapter, that involution
is a projective property; that is, six rays in involution are
cut by any transversal in six points in involution.</p>

<pb n="81" /><anchor id="Pg81" /></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="136. Pencils of rays of the second order in involution" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p136" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">136. Pencils of rays of the second order in involution.</hi>
We may also extend the notion of involution to pencils
of rays of the second order. Thus, <hi rend="font-style: italic">the tangents to a
conic are in involution when they are corresponding rays
of two protective pencils of the second order superposed
upon the same conic, and when they correspond to each
other doubly.</hi> We have then the theorem:</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="137. Theorem concerning pencils of the second
order in involution" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p137" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">137.</hi>  <hi rend="font-style: italic">The intersections of corresponding rays of a pencil
of the second order in involution are all on a straight
line <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi>, and the intersection of any two tangents <hi rend="font-style: italic">ab</hi>, when
joined to the intersection of the corresponding tangents <hi rend="font-style: italic">a'b'</hi>,
gives a line which passes through a fixed point <hi rend="font-style: italic">U</hi>, the pole
of the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> with respect to the conic.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="138. Involution of rays determined by a conic" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p138" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">138. Involution of rays determined by a conic.</hi>  We
have seen in the theory of poles and polars (§ 103)
that if a point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> moves along a line <hi rend="font-style: italic">m</hi>, then the polar
of <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> revolves about a point. This pencil cuts out on <hi rend="font-style: italic">m</hi>
another point-row <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi>, projective also to <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>. Since the
polar of <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> passes through <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi>, the polar of <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi> also passes
through <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>, so that the correspondence between <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi> is double. The two point-rows are therefore in involution,
and the double points, if any exist, are the points
where the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">m</hi> meets the conic. A similar involution
of rays may be found at any point in the plane, corresponding
rays passing each through the pole of the other.
We have called such points and rays <hi rend="font-style: italic">conjugate</hi>  with
respect to the conic (§ 100). We may then state the
following important theorem:</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="139. Statement of theorem" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p139" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">139.</hi>  <hi rend="font-style: italic">A conic determines on every line in its plane an
involution of points, corresponding points in the involution
<pb n="82" /><anchor id="Pg82" />
being conjugate with respect to the conic. The double points,
if any exist, are the points where the line meets the conic.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="140. Dual of the theorem" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p140" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">140.</hi>  The dual theorem reads: <hi rend="font-style: italic">A conic determines at
every point in the plane an involution of rays, corresponding
rays being conjugate with respect to the conic. The
double rays, if any exist, are the tangents from the point
to the conic.</hi></p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<head>PROBLEMS</head>

<p>1.  Two lines are drawn through a point on a conic so
as always to make right angles with each other. Show that
the lines joining the points where they meet the conic again
all pass through a fixed point.</p>

<p>2.  Two lines are drawn through a fixed point on a conic
so as always to make equal angles with the tangent at that
point. Show that the lines joining the two points where the
lines meet the conic again all pass through a fixed point.</p>

<p>3.  Four lines divide the plane into a certain number of
regions. Determine for each region whether two conics or
none may be drawn to pass through points of it and also
to be tangent to the four lines.</p>

<p>4.  If a variable quadrangle move in such a way as
always to remain inscribed in a fixed conic, while three of
its sides turn each around one of three fixed collinear points,
then the fourth will also turn around a fourth fixed point
collinear with the other three.</p>

<p>5.  State and prove the dual of problem 4.</p>

<p>6.  Extend problem 4 as follows: If a variable polygon of
an even number of sides move in such a way as always to
remain inscribed in a fixed conic, while all its sides but one
pass through as many fixed collinear points, then the last side
will also pass through a fixed point collinear with the others.</p>

<pb n="83" /><anchor id="Pg83" />

<p>7. If a triangle <hi rend="font-style: italic">QRS</hi> be inscribed in a conic, and if a
transversal <hi rend="font-style: italic">s</hi> meet two of its sides in <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi>, the third
side and the tangent at the opposite vertex in <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi>, and
the conic itself in <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi>, then <hi rend="font-style: italic">AA'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">BB'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">CC'</hi> are three
pairs of points in an involution.</p>

<p>8. Use the last exercise to solve the problem: Given five
points, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Q</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">R</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi>, on a conic, to draw the tangent at any
one of them.</p>

<p>9. State and prove the dual of problem 7 and use it to
prove the dual of problem 8.</p>

<p>10. If a transversal cut two tangents to a conic in <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi>, their chord of contact in <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, and the conic itself in <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi>, then the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> is a double point of the involution
determined by <hi rend="font-style: italic">BB'</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">PP'</hi>.</p>

<p>11. State and prove the dual of problem 10.</p>

<p>12. If a variable conic pass through two given points,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi>, and if it be tangent to two given lines, the chord
of contact of these two tangents will always pass through
a fixed point on <hi rend="font-style: italic">PP'</hi>.</p>

<p>13. Use the last theorem to solve the problem: Given
four points, <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Q</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>, on a conic, and the tangent at one of
them, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Q</hi>, to draw the tangent at any one of the other points, <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>.</p>

<p>14. Apply the theorem of problem 9 to the case of a
hyperbola where the two tangents are the asymptotes. Show
in this way that if a hyperbola and its asymptotes be cut
by a transversal, the segments intercepted by the curve and
by the asymptotes respectively have the same middle point.</p>

<p>15. In a triangle circumscribed about a conic, any side is
divided harmonically by its point of contact and the point
where it meets the chord joining the points of contact of the
other two sides.</p>
</div>
</div>


<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n="84" /><anchor id="Pg84" />
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER IX - METRICAL PROPERTIES OF INVOLUTIONS</head>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="141. Introduction of infinite point; center of involution" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image39.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 39</head>
<figDesc>Figure 39</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p><anchor id="p141" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">141. Introduction of infinite point; center of involution.</hi>
We connect the projective theory of involution with the
metrical, as usual, by the introduction of the elements at
infinity. In an involution of points on a line the point
which corresponds to the infinitely distant point is called
the <hi rend="font-style: italic">center</hi> of the involution. Since corresponding points
in the involution have been shown to be harmonic conjugates
with respect to the double points, the center is
midway between the double points when they exist. To
construct the center (Fig. 39) we draw as usual through
<hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi> any two rays and cut them by a line parallel
to <hi rend="font-style: italic">AA'</hi> in the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">K</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>. Join these points to
<hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi>, thus determining on <hi rend="font-style: italic">AK</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">AN</hi> the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi>
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi>. <hi rend="font-style: italic">LN</hi> meets <hi rend="font-style: italic">AA'</hi> in the center <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi> of the involution.</p>

<pb n="85" /><anchor id="Pg85" /></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="142. Fundamental metrical theorem" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p142" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">142. Fundamental metrical theorem.</hi>  From the figure
we see that the triangles <hi rend="font-style: italic">OLB'</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">PLM</hi> are similar, <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>
being the intersection of KM and LN. Also the triangles
<hi rend="font-style: italic">KPN</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">BON</hi> are similar. We thus have</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">OB : PK = ON : PN</hi>
</p>

<p>and</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">OB' : PM = OL : PL;</hi>
</p>

<p>whence</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">OB · OB' : PK · PM = ON · OL : PN · PL.</hi>
</p>

<p>In the same way, from the similar triangles <hi rend="font-style: italic">OAL</hi> and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">PKL</hi>, and also <hi rend="font-style: italic">OA'N</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">PMN</hi>, we obtain</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">OA · OA' : PK · PM = ON · OL : PN · PL,</hi>
</p>

<p>and this, with the preceding, gives at once the fundamental
theorem, which is sometimes taken also as the
definition of involution:</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">OA · OA' = OB · OB' = <hi rend="font-style: normal">constant</hi>,</hi>
</p>

<p>or, in words,</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">The product of the distances from the center to two corresponding
points in an involution of points is constant.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="143. Existence of double points" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p143" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">143. Existence of double points.</hi>  Clearly, according as
the constant is positive or negative the involution will
or will not have double points. The constant is the
square root of the distance from the center to the
double points. If <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi> lie both on the same side
of the center, the product <hi rend="font-style: italic">OA · OA'</hi> is positive; and if
they lie on opposite sides, it is negative. Take the case
where they both lie on the same side of the center, and
take also the pair of corresponding points <hi rend="font-style: italic">BB'</hi>. Then,
since <hi rend="font-style: italic">OA · OA' = OB · OB'</hi>, it cannot happen that <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi> are separated from each other by <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi>. This is
evident enough if the points are on opposite sides of
the center. If the pairs are on the same side of the
<pb n="86" /><anchor id="Pg86" />
center, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> lies between <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi>, so that <hi rend="font-style: italic">OB</hi> is
greater, say, than <hi rend="font-style: italic">OA</hi>, but less than <hi rend="font-style: italic">OA'</hi>, then, by the
equation <hi rend="font-style: italic">OA · OA' = OB · OB'</hi>, we must have <hi rend="font-style: italic">OB'</hi> also
less than <hi rend="font-style: italic">OA'</hi> and greater than <hi rend="font-style: italic">OA</hi>. A similar discussion
may be made for the case where <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi> lie on
opposite sides of <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi>. The results may be stated as
follows, without any reference to the center:</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Given two pairs of points in an involution of points, if
the points of one pair are separated from each other by
the points of the other pair, then the involution has no
double points. If the points of one pair are not separated
from each other by the points of the other pair, then the
involution has two double points.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="144. Existence of double rays" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p144" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">144.</hi>  An entirely similar criterion decides whether an
involution of rays has or has not double rays, or whether
an involution of planes has or has not double planes.</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image40.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 40</head>
<figDesc>Figure 40</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="145. Construction of an involution by means of circles" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p145" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">145. Construction of
an involution by means of circles.</hi> The equation just derived, <hi
rend="font-style: italic">OA · OA' = OB · OB'</hi>, indicates another
simple way in which points of an involution of points may be
constructed. Through <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi
rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi> draw any circle, and draw also any
circle through <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> and <hi
rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi> to cut the first in the two points <hi
rend="font-style: italic">G</hi> and <hi rend="font-style:
italic">G'</hi> (Fig. 40). Then any circle through <hi rend="font-style:
italic">G</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">G'</hi> will meet the
line in pairs of points in the involution determined by <hi
rend="font-style: italic">AA'</hi> and <hi rend="font-style:
italic">BB'</hi>. For if such a circle meets the line in the points <hi
rend="font-style: italic">CC'</hi>, then, by the theorem in the geometry
of the circle which says that <hi rend="font-style: italic">if any chord
is
<pb n="87" /><anchor id="Pg87" />
drawn through a fixed point within a circle, the product of its segments
is constant in whatever direction the chord is drawn, and if a secant
line be drawn from a fixed point without a circle, the product of the
secant and its external segment is constant in whatever direction the
secant line is drawn</hi>, we have <hi rend="font-style: italic">OC ·
OC' = OG · OG' =</hi> constant. So that for all such points
<hi rend="font-style: italic">OA · OA' = OB · OB' = OC ·
OC'</hi>. Further, the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">GG'</hi>
meets <hi rend="font-style: italic">AA'</hi> in the center of the
involution. To find the double points, if they exist, we draw a tangent
from <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi> to any of the circles through
<hi rend="font-style: italic">GG'</hi>. Let <hi rend="font-style:
italic">T</hi> be the point of contact. Then lay off on the line <hi
rend="font-style: italic">OA</hi> a line <hi rend="font-style:
italic">OF</hi> equal to <hi rend="font-style: italic">OT</hi>. Then,
since by the above theorem of elementary geometry
<hi rend="font-style: italic">OA · OA' = OT<hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi> = OF<hi rend="vertical-align: super">2</hi></hi>, we have one double
point <hi rend="font-style: italic">F</hi>. The other is at an equal
distance on the other side of <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi>. This
simple and effective method of constructing an involution of points is
often taken as the basis for the theory of involution. In projective
geometry, however, the circle, which is not a figure that remains
unaltered by projection, and is essentially a metrical notion, ought not
to be used to build up the purely projective part of the theory.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="146. Circular points" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p146" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">146.</hi>  It ought to be mentioned that the theory of
analytic geometry indicates that the circle is a special
conic section that happens to pass through two particular
imaginary points on the line at infinity, called the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">circular points</hi> and usually denoted by <hi rend="font-style: italic">I</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">J</hi>. The
above method of obtaining a point-row in involution is,
then, nothing but a special case of the general theorem
of the last chapter (§ 125), which asserted that a system
of conics through four points will cut any line in the
plane in a point-row in involution.</p>

<pb n="88" /><anchor id="Pg88" />

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image41.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 41</head>
<figDesc>Figure 41</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="147. Pairs in an involution of rays which are at right
angles. Circular involution" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p147" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">147. Pairs in an involution of rays which are at right
angles. Circular involution.</hi> In an involution of rays
there is no one ray which may be distinguished from
all the others as the point at infinity is distinguished
from all other points on a line. There is one pair of
rays, however, which does differ from all the others in
that for this particular pair the angle is a right angle.
This is most easily shown by using the construction
that employs circles, as indicated above. The centers of
all the circles through <hi rend="font-style: italic">G</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">G'</hi> lie on the perpendicular
bisector of the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">GG'</hi>. Let
this line meet the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">AA'</hi>
in the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi> (Fig. 41), and
draw the circle with center <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>
which goes through <hi rend="font-style: italic">G</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">G'</hi>.
This circle cuts out two points
<hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">M'</hi> in the involution. The rays <hi rend="font-style: italic">GM</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">GM'</hi> are
clearly at right angles, being inscribed in a semicircle.
If, therefore, the involution of points is projected to
<hi rend="font-style: italic">G</hi>, we have found two corresponding rays which are
at right angles to each other. Given now any involution
of rays with center <hi rend="font-style: italic">G</hi>, we may cut across it
by a straight line and proceed to find the two points
<hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">M'</hi>. Clearly there will be only one such pair
unless the perpendicular bisector of <hi rend="font-style: italic">GG'</hi> coincides with
the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">AA'</hi>. In this case every ray is at right angles
to its corresponding ray, and the involution is called
<hi rend="font-style: italic">circular</hi>.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="148. Axes of conics" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p148" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">148. Axes of conics.</hi>  At the close of the last chapter
(§ 140) we gave the theorem: <hi rend="font-style: italic">A conic determines at every
point in its plane an involution of rays, corresponding rays
<pb n="89" /><anchor id="Pg89" />
being conjugate with respect to the conic. The double rays,
if any exist, are the tangents from the point to the conic.</hi>
In particular, taking the point as the center of the
conic, we find that conjugate diameters form a system
of rays in involution, of which the asymptotes, if there
are any, are the double rays. Also, conjugate diameters
are harmonic conjugates with respect to the asymptotes.
By the theorem of the last paragraph, there are two
conjugate diameters which are at right angles to each
other. These are called axes. In the case of the parabola,
where the center is at infinity, and on the curve,
there are, properly speaking, no conjugate diameters.
While the line at infinity might be considered as conjugate
to all the other diameters, it is not possible to
assign to it any particular direction, and so it cannot be
used for the purpose of defining an axis of a parabola.
There is one diameter, however, which is at right angles
to its conjugate system of chords, and this one is called
the <hi rend="font-style: italic">axis</hi> of the parabola. The circle also furnishes an
exception in that every diameter is an axis. The involution
in this case is circular, every ray being at right
angles to its conjugate ray at the center.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="149. Points at which the involution determined by
a conic is circular" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p149" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">149. Points at which the involution determined by
a conic is circular.</hi> It is an important problem to discover
whether for any conic other than the circle it is
possible to find any point in the plane where the involution
determined as above by the conic is circular.
We shall proceed to the curious problem of proving the
existence of such points and of determining their number
and situation. We shall then develop the important
properties of such points.</p>

<pb n="90" /><anchor id="Pg90" /></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="150. Properties of such a point" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p150" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">150.</hi>  It is clear, in the first place, that such a point
cannot be on the outside of the conic, else the involution
would have double rays and such rays would have
to be at right angles to themselves. In the second
place, if two such points exist, the line joining them
must be a diameter and, indeed, an axis. For if <hi rend="font-style: italic">F</hi>
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">F'</hi> were two such points, then, since the conjugate
ray at <hi rend="font-style: italic">F</hi> to the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">FF'</hi> must be at right angles to it,
and also since the conjugate ray at <hi rend="font-style: italic">F'</hi> to the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">FF'</hi>
must be at right angles to it, the pole of <hi rend="font-style: italic">FF'</hi> must
be at infinity in a direction at right angles to <hi rend="font-style: italic">FF'</hi>.
The line <hi rend="font-style: italic">FF'</hi> is then a diameter, and since it is at
right angles to its conjugate diameter, it must be an
axis. From this it follows also that the points we are
seeking must all lie on one of the two axes, else we
should have a diameter which does not go through
the intersection of all axes&mdash;the center of the conic.
At least one axis, therefore, must be free from any
such points.</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image42.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 42</head>
<figDesc>Figure 42</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="151. Position of such a point" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p151" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">151.</hi>  Let now <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> be a point on one of the axes (Fig. 42),
and draw any ray through it, such as <hi rend="font-style: italic">q</hi>. As <hi rend="font-style: italic">q</hi> revolves
about <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>, its pole <hi rend="font-style: italic">Q</hi> moves along a line at right angles
to the axis on which <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> lies, describing a point-row <hi rend="font-style: italic">p</hi>
projective to the pencil of rays <hi rend="font-style: italic">q</hi>. The point at infinity
in a direction at right angles to <hi rend="font-style: italic">q</hi> also describes a point-row
projective to <hi rend="font-style: italic">q</hi>. The line joining corresponding
points of these two point-rows is always a conjugate
line to <hi rend="font-style: italic">q</hi> and at right angles to <hi rend="font-style: italic">q</hi>, or, as we may call it,
a <hi rend="font-style: italic">conjugate normal</hi> to <hi rend="font-style: italic">q</hi>. These conjugate normals to <hi rend="font-style: italic">q</hi>,
joining as they do corresponding points in two projective
point-rows, form a pencil of rays of the second
<pb n="91" /><anchor id="Pg91" />
order. But since the point at infinity on the point-row
<hi rend="font-style: italic">Q</hi> corresponds to the point at infinity in a direction
at right angles to <hi rend="font-style: italic">q</hi>, these point-rows are in perspective
position and the normal conjugates of all the lines
through <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> meet in a point. This point lies on the
same axis with <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>, as is seen by taking <hi rend="font-style: italic">q</hi> at right angles
to the axis on which <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> lies. The center of this pencil
may be called <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi>, and thus we have paired the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>
with the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi>. By moving the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> along the
axis, and by keeping the
ray <hi rend="font-style: italic">q</hi> parallel to a fixed
direction, we may see that
the point-row <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> and the
point-row <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi> are projective.
Also the correspondence is
double, and by starting
from the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi> we arrive
at the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>. Therefore
the point-rows <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi> are
in involution, and if only
the involution has double points, we shall have found
in them the points we are seeking. For it is clear that
the rays through <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> and the corresponding rays through
<hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi> are conjugate normals; and if <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi> coincide, we
shall have a point where all rays are at right angles
to their conjugates. We shall now show that the involution
thus obtained on one of the two axes must have
double points.</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image43.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 43</head>
<figDesc>Figure 43</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="152. Discovery of the foci of the conic" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p152" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">152. Discovery of the foci of the conic.</hi>  We know
that on one axis no such points as we are seeking can
lie (§ 150). The involution of points <hi rend="font-style: italic">PP'</hi> on this axis
<pb n="92" /><anchor id="Pg92" />
can therefore have no double points. Nevertheless, let
<hi rend="font-style: italic">PP'</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">RR'</hi> be two pairs of corresponding points on
this axis (Fig. 43). Then we know that <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi> are
separated from each other by <hi rend="font-style: italic">R</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">R'</hi> (§ 143). Draw
a circle on <hi rend="font-style: italic">PP'</hi> as a diameter, and one on <hi rend="font-style: italic">RR'</hi> as a
diameter. These must intersect in
two points, <hi rend="font-style: italic">F</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">F'</hi>, and since the
center of the conic is the center
of the involution <hi rend="font-style: italic">PP'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">RR'</hi>, as is
easily seen, it follows that <hi rend="font-style: italic">F</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">F'</hi>
are on the other axis of the conic.
Moreover, <hi rend="font-style: italic">FR</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">FR'</hi> are conjugate
normal rays, since <hi rend="font-style: italic">RFR'</hi> is
inscribed in a semicircle, and the
two rays go one through <hi rend="font-style: italic">R</hi> and the other through <hi rend="font-style: italic">R'</hi>.
The involution of points <hi rend="font-style: italic">PP'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">RR'</hi> therefore projects
to the two points <hi rend="font-style: italic">F</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">F'</hi> in two pencils of rays in
involution which have for corresponding rays conjugate
normals to the conic. We may, then, say:</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">There are two and only two points of the plane where
the involution determined by the conic is circular. These
two points lie on one of the axes, at equal distances from
the center, on the inside of the conic. These points are
called the foci of the conic.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="153. The circle and the parabola" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p153" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">153. The circle and the parabola.</hi>  The above discussion
applies only to the central conics, apart from
the circle. In the circle the two foci fall together at the
center. In the case of the parabola, that part of the
investigation which proves the existence of two foci on
one of the axes will not hold, as we have but one
<pb n="93" /><anchor id="Pg93" />
axis. It is seen, however, that as <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> moves to infinity,
carrying the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">q</hi> with it, <hi rend="font-style: italic">q</hi> becomes the line at infinity,
which for the parabola is a tangent line. Its pole
<hi rend="font-style: italic">Q</hi> is thus at infinity and also the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi>, so that <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">P'</hi> fall together at infinity, and therefore one focus
of the parabola is at infinity. There must therefore be
another, so that</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">A parabola has one and only one focus in the finite
part of the plane.</hi></p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image44.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 44</head>
<figDesc>Figure 44</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="154. Focal properties of conics" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p154" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">154. Focal properties of conics.</hi>  We proceed to develop
some theorems which will exhibit the importance
of these points in the theory of the conic section.
Draw a tangent to the conic, and also the normal
at the point of contact <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>. These
two lines are clearly conjugate
normals. The two points <hi rend="font-style: italic">T</hi> and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi>, therefore, where they meet the
axis which contains the foci, are
corresponding points in the involution
considered above, and are
therefore harmonic conjugates with respect to the foci
(Fig. 44); and if we join them to the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>, we
shall obtain four harmonic lines. But two of them
are at right angles to each other, and so the others
make equal angles with them (Problem 4, Chapter II).
Therefore</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">The lines joining a point on the conic to the foci make
equal angles with the tangent.</hi></p>

<p>It follows that rays from a source of light at one
focus are reflected by an ellipse to the other.</p>

<pb n="94" /><anchor id="Pg94" /></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="155. Case of the parabola" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p155" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">155.</hi>  In the case of the parabola, where one of the
foci must be considered to be at infinity in the direction
of the diameter, we have</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image45.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 45</head>
<figDesc>Figure 45</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">A diameter makes the same
angle with the tangent at its
extremity as that tangent does
with the line from its point of
contact to the focus (Fig. 45).</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="156. Parabolic reflector" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p156" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">156.</hi>  This last theorem is the basis for the construction
of the parabolic reflector. A ray of light from the
focus is reflected from such a reflector in a direction
parallel to the axis of the reflector.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="157. Directrix. Principal axis. Vertex" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p157" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">157. Directrix. Principal axis. Vertex.</hi>  The polar of
the focus with respect to the conic is called the <hi rend="font-style: italic">directrix</hi>.
The axis which contains the foci is called the <hi rend="font-style: italic">principal
axis</hi>, and the intersection of the axis with the curve is
called the <hi rend="font-style: italic">vertex</hi> of the curve. The directrix is at right
angles to the principal axis. In a parabola the vertex
is equally distant from the focus and the directrix,
these three points and the point at infinity on the axis
being four harmonic points. In the ellipse the vertex is
nearer to the focus than it is to the directrix, for the
same reason, and in the hyperbola it is farther from
the focus than it is from the directrix.</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image46.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 46</head>
<figDesc>Figure 46</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="158. Another definition of a conic" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p158" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">158. Another definition of a conic.</hi>  Let <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> be any point
on the directrix through which a line is drawn meeting
the conic in the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> (Fig. 46). Let the tangents
at <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> meet in <hi rend="font-style: italic">T</hi>, and call the focus <hi rend="font-style: italic">F</hi>. Then
<hi rend="font-style: italic">TF</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">PF</hi> are conjugate lines, and as they pass through
a focus they must be at right angles to each other. Let
<pb n="95" /><anchor id="Pg95" />
<hi rend="font-style: italic">TF</hi> meet <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>. Then <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi> are four harmonic
points. Project these four points parallel to <hi rend="font-style: italic">TF</hi> upon
the directrix, and we then get
the four harmonic points <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Q</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi>. Since, now, <hi rend="font-style: italic">TFP</hi> is
a right angle, the angles <hi rend="font-style: italic">MFQ</hi>
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">NFQ</hi> are equal, as well
as the angles <hi rend="font-style: italic">AFC</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">BFC</hi>.
Therefore the triangles <hi rend="font-style: italic">MAF</hi>
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">NFB</hi> are similar, and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">FA : FM = FB : BN</hi>. Dropping
perpendiculars <hi rend="font-style: italic">AA</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">BB'</hi>
upon the directrix, this becomes
<hi rend="font-style: italic">FA : AA' = FB : BB'</hi>. We
have thus the property often taken as the definition
of a conic:</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">The ratio of the distances from a point on the conic to
the focus and the directrix is constant.</hi></p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image47.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 47</head>
<figDesc>Figure 47</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="159. Eccentricity" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p159" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">159. Eccentricity.</hi>  By taking the point at the vertex
of the conic, we note that this ratio is less than unity
for the ellipse, greater than unity for the hyperbola,
and equal to unity for the parabola. This ratio is called the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">eccentricity</hi>.</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image48.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 48</head>
<figDesc>Figure 48</figDesc>
</figure></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="160. Sum or difference of focal
distances" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p160" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">160. Sum or difference of focal
distances.</hi> The ellipse and the
hyperbola have two foci and
two directrices. The eccentricity, of course, is the same
for one focus as for the other, since the curve is symmetrical
with respect to both. If the distances from
<pb n="96" /><anchor id="Pg96" />
a point on a conic to the two foci are <hi rend="font-style: italic">r</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">r'</hi>, and
the distances from the same point to the corresponding
directrices are <hi rend="font-style: italic">d</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">d'</hi>
(Fig. 47), we have <hi rend="font-style: italic">r : d = r' : d'</hi>;
<hi rend="font-style: italic">(r ± r') : (d ± d')</hi>. In the
ellipse <hi rend="font-style: italic">(d + d')</hi> is constant,
being the distance between
the directrices. In the hyperbola
this distance is <hi rend="font-style: italic">(d - d')</hi>.
It follows (Fig. 48) that</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">In the ellipse the sum of the
focal distances of any point
on the curve is constant, and
in the hyperbola the difference between the focal distances
is constant.</hi></p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<head>PROBLEMS</head>

<p>1. Construct the axis of a parabola, given four tangents.</p>

<p>2.  Given two conjugate lines at right angles to each
other, and let them meet the axis which has no foci on it
in the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>. The circle on <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi> as diameter will
pass through the foci of the conic.</p>

<p>3.  Given the axes of a conic in position, and also a
tangent with its point of contact, to construct the foci and
determine the length of the axes.</p>

<p>4. Given the tangent at the vertex of a parabola, and
two other tangents, to find the focus.</p>

<p>5. The locus of the center of a circle touching two given
circles is a conic with the centers of the given circles for
its foci.</p>

<p>6. Given the axis of a parabola and a tangent, with its
point of contact, to find the focus.</p>

<pb n="97" /><anchor id="Pg97" />

<p>7. The locus of the center of a circle which touches a
given line and a given circle consists of two parabolas.</p>

<p>8.  Let <hi rend="font-style: italic">F</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">F'</hi> be the foci of an ellipse, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> any
point on it. Produce <hi rend="font-style: italic">PF</hi> to <hi rend="font-style: italic">G</hi>, making <hi rend="font-style: italic">PG</hi> equal to <hi rend="font-style: italic">PF'</hi>.
Find the locus of <hi rend="font-style: italic">G</hi>.</p>

<p>9.  If the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">G</hi> of a circle be folded over upon a
point <hi rend="font-style: italic">F</hi>, the creases will all be tangent to a conic. If <hi rend="font-style: italic">F</hi> is
within the circle, the conic will be an ellipse; if <hi rend="font-style: italic">F</hi> is without
the circle, the conic will be a hyperbola.</p>

<p>10. If the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">G</hi> in the last example be taken on a
straight line, the locus is a parabola.</p>

<p>11.  Find the foci and the length of the principal axis of
the conics in problems 9 and 10.</p>

<p>12. In problem 10 a correspondence is set up between
straight lines and parabolas. As there is a fourfold infinity
of parabolas in the plane, and only a twofold infinity of
straight lines, there must be some restriction on the parabolas
obtained by this method. Find and explain this
restriction.</p>

<p>13. State and explain the similar problem for problem 9.</p>

<p>14. The last four problems are a study of the consequences
of the following transformation: A point <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi> is fixed
in the plane. Then to any point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> is made to correspond
the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">p</hi> at right angles to <hi rend="font-style: italic">OP</hi> and bisecting it. In this
correspondence, what happens to <hi rend="font-style: italic">p</hi> when <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> moves along a
straight line? What corresponds to the theorem that two
lines have only one point in common? What to the theorem
that the angle sum of a triangle is two right angles? Etc.</p>

</div>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<pb n="98" /><anchor id="Pg98" />
<head>CHAPTER X - ON THE HISTORY OF SYNTHETIC PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY</head>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="161. Ancient results" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p161" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">161. Ancient results.</hi>  The theory of synthetic projective
geometry as we have built it up in this course is
less than a century old. This is not to say that many of
the theorems and principles involved were not discovered
much earlier, but isolated theorems do not make a
theory, any more than a pile of bricks makes a building.
The materials for our building have been contributed
by many different workmen from the days of Euclid
down to the present time. Thus, the notion of four
harmonic points was familiar to the ancients, who considered
it from the metrical point of view as the division
of a line internally and externally in the same ratio<note place="foot"><p>The
more general notion of <hi rend="font-style: italic">anharmonic ratio</hi>, which includes
the harmonic ratio as a special case, was also known to the ancients.
While we have not found it necessary to make use of the anharmonic
ratio in building up our theory, it is so frequently met with in treatises
on geometry that some account of it should be given.</p>

<p>Consider any four points, <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>, on a line, and join them to
any point <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> not on that line. Then the triangles <hi rend="font-style: italic">ASB</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">GSD</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">ASD</hi>,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">CSB</hi>, having all the same altitude, are to each other as their bases.
Also, since the area of any triangle is one half the product of any two
of its sides by the sine of the angle included between them, we have</p>

<p rend="text-align: center"><formula notation="tex">\[
\frac{AB \times CD}{AD \times CB} = \frac{AS \times BS \sin ASB \times CS
\times DS \sin CSD}{AS \times DS \sin ASD \times CS \times BS \sin CSB} =
\frac{\sin ASB \times \sin CSD}{\sin ASD \times \sin CSB}
\]</formula></p>

<p>Now the fraction on the right would be unchanged if instead of the
points <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> we should take any other four points <hi rend="font-style: italic">A'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D'</hi>
lying on any other line cutting across <hi rend="font-style: italic">SA</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">SB</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">SC</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">SD</hi>. In other
words, <hi rend="font-style: italic">the fraction on the left is unaltered in value if the points
<hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> are replaced by any other four points perspective to them.</hi>
Again, the fraction on the left is unchanged if some other point were
taken instead of <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>. In other words, <hi rend="font-style: italic">the fraction on the right is
unaltered if we replace the four lines <hi rend="font-style: italic">SA</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">SB</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">SC</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">SD</hi> by any other four
lines perspective to them.</hi> The fraction on the left is called the <hi rend="font-style: italic">anharmonic
ratio</hi> of the four points <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>; the fraction on the right
is called the <hi rend="font-style: italic">anharmonic ratio</hi>  of the four lines <hi rend="font-style: italic">SA</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">SB</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">SC</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">SD</hi>. The
anharmonic ratio of four points is sometimes written (<hi rend="font-style: italic">ABCD</hi>), so that</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<formula notation="tex">
\[
\frac{AB \times CD}{AD \times CB} = (ABCD).
\]
</formula>
</p>

<p>If we take the points in different order, the value of the anharmonic
ratio will not necessarily remain the same. The twenty-four different
ways of writing them will, however, give not more than six different
values for the anharmonic ratio, for by writing out the fractions
which define them we can find that <hi rend="font-style: italic">(ABCD) = (BADC) = (CDAB) = (DCBA)</hi>.
If we write <hi rend="font-style: italic">(ABCD) = a</hi>, it is not difficult to show that
the six values are</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<formula notation="tex">
\[
a; 1/a; 1-a; 1/(1-a); (a-1)/a; a/(a-1).
\]
</formula>
</p>

<p>The proof of this we leave to the student.</p>

<p>If <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> are four harmonic points (see Fig. 6, p. *22), and a quadrilateral
<hi rend="font-style: italic">KLMN</hi> is constructed such that <hi rend="font-style: italic">KL</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">MN</hi> pass through
<hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">KN</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">LM</hi> through <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">LN</hi> through <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">KM</hi> through <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi>, then,
projecting <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> from <hi rend="font-style: italic">L</hi> upon <hi rend="font-style: italic">KM</hi>, we have <hi rend="font-style: italic">(ABCD) = (KOMD)</hi>,
where <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi> is the intersection of <hi rend="font-style: italic">KM</hi> with <hi rend="font-style: italic">LN</hi>. But, projecting again
the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">K</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> from <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi> back upon the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi>, we have
<hi rend="font-style: italic">(KOMD) = (CBAD)</hi>. From this we have</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<hi rend="font-style: italic">(ABCD) = (CBAD),</hi>
</p>

<p>or</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<formula notation="tex">
\[
a=a/(a-1);
\]
</formula>
</p>

<p>whence <hi rend="font-style: italic">a = 0</hi> or <hi
rend="font-style: italic">a = 2</hi>. But it is easy to see that <hi
rend="font-style: italic">a = 0</hi> implies that two of the four points
coincide. For four harmonic points, therefore, the six values of the
anharmonic ratio reduce to three, namely, 2, <formula
notation="tex">$\frac{1}{2}$</formula>, and -1. Incidentally we see that
if an interchange of any two points in an anharmonic ratio does not
change its value, then the four points are harmonic.</p>

<p rend="text-align: center">
<figure rend="w95" url="images/image49.png">
<head><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Fig.</hi> 49</head>
<figDesc>Figure 49</figDesc>
</figure></p>

<p>Many theorems of projective geometry are succinctly stated in
terms of anharmonic ratios. Thus, the <hi rend="font-style: italic">anharmonic ratio of any four
elements of a form is equal to the anharmonic ratio of the corresponding
four elements in any form projectively related to it. The anharmonic
ratio of the lines joining any four fixed points on a conic to a variable
fifthpoint on the conic is constant. The
locus of points from which four points
in a plane are seen along four rays of
constant anharmonic ratio is a conic
through the four points.</hi> We leave these
theorems for the student, who may
also justify the following solution of
the problem: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Given three points and
a certain anharmonic ratio, to find a
fourth point which shall have with the
given three the given anharmonic ratio.</hi>
Let <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">D</hi> be the three given points
(Fig. 49). On any convenient line
through <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> take two points <hi rend="font-style: italic">B'</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">D'</hi>
such that <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB'/AD'</hi> is equal to the
given anharmonic ratio. Join <hi rend="font-style: italic">BB'</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">DD'</hi> and let the two lines
meet in <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>. Draw through <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> a parallel to <hi rend="font-style: italic">AB'</hi>. This line will meet
<hi rend="font-style: italic">AB</hi> in the required point <hi rend="font-style: italic">C</hi>.</p></note>
the involution of six points cut out by any transversal
which intersects the sides of a complete quadrilateral
<pb n="100" /><anchor id="Pg100" />
as studied by Pappus<note place="foot"><p>
Pappus, Mathematicae Collectiones, vii, 129.</p></note>;
but these notions were not
made the foundation for any general theory. Taken by
themselves, they are of small consequence; it is their
relation to other theorems and sets of theorems that
gives them their importance. The ancients were doubtless
familiar with the theorem, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Two lines determine a
point, and two points determine a line</hi>, but they had
no glimpse of the wonderful law of duality, of which
this theorem is a simple example. The principle of
projection, by which many properties of the conic sections
may be inferred from corresponding properties
of the circle which forms the base of the cone from
which they are cut&mdash;a principle so natural to modern
mathematicians&mdash;seems not to have occurred to the
Greeks. The ellipse, the hyperbola, and the parabola
<pb n="101" /><anchor id="Pg101" />
were to them entirely different curves, to be treated
separately with methods appropriate to each. Thus the
focus of the ellipse was discovered some five hundred
years before the focus of the parabola! It was not till
1522 that Verner<note place="foot"><p>J. Verneri, Libellus super vigintiduobus elementis conicis, etc. 1522.</p></note>
of Nürnberg undertook to demonstrate
the properties of the conic sections by means of
the circle.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="162. Unifying principles" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p162" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">162. Unifying principles.</hi>  In the early years of the
seventeenth century&mdash;that wonderful epoch in the
history of the world which produced a Galileo, a Kepler,
a Tycho Brahe, a Descartes, a Desargues, a Pascal,
a Cavalieri, a Wallis, a Fermat, a Huygens, a Bacon,
a Napier, and a goodly array of lesser lights, to say
nothing of a Rembrandt or of a Shakespeare&mdash;there
began to appear certain unifying principles connecting
the great mass of material dug out by the ancients.
Thus, in 1604 the great astronomer Kepler<note place="foot"><p>Kepler, Ad Vitellionem paralipomena quibus astronomiae pars
optica traditur. 1604.</p></note> introduced
the notion that parallel lines should be considered as
meeting at an infinite distance, and that a parabola is at
once the limiting case of an ellipse and of a hyperbola.
He also attributes to the parabola a "blind focus"
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">caecus focus</hi>) at infinity on the axis.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="163. Desargues" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p163" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">163. Desargues.</hi>  In 1639 Desargues,<note place="foot"><p>Desargues, Bruillon-project d'une atteinte aux événements des
rencontres d'un cône avec un plan. 1639. Edited and analyzed by
Poudra, 1864.</p></note> an architect of
Lyons, published a little treatise on the conic sections,
in which appears the theorem upon which we have
founded the theory of four harmonic points (§ 25).
<pb n="102" /><anchor id="Pg102" />
Desargues, however, does not make use of it for that
purpose. Four harmonic points are for him a special
case of six points in involution when two of the three
pairs coincide giving double points. His development
of the theory of involution is also different from the
purely geometric one which we have adopted, and is
based on the theorem (§ 142) that the product of the
distances of two conjugate points from the center is
constant. He also proves the projective character of
an involution of points by showing that when six lines
pass through a point and through six points in involution,
then any transversal must meet them in six points
which are also in involution.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="164. Poles and polars" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p164" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">164. Poles and polars.</hi>  In this little treatise is also
contained the theory of poles and polars. The polar
line is called a <hi rend="font-style: italic">traversal</hi>.<note place="foot"><p>The term 'pole' was first introduced, in the sense in which we
have used it, in 1810, by a French mathematician named Servois
(Gergonne, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Annales des Mathéématiques</hi>, I, 337), and the corresponding
term 'polar' by the editor, Gergonne, of this same journal three years
later.</p></note> The harmonic properties of
poles and polars are given, but Desargues seems not
to have arrived at the metrical properties which result
when the infinite elements of the plane are introduced.
Thus he says, "When the <hi rend="font-style: italic">traversal</hi>  is at an infinite
distance, all is unimaginable."</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="165. Desargues's theorem concerning conics through
four points" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p165" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">165. Desargues's theorem concerning conics through
four points.</hi> We find in this little book the beautiful
theorem concerning a quadrilateral inscribed in a conic
section, which is given by his name in § 138. The
theorem is not given in terms of a system of conics
through four points, for Desargues had no conception of
<pb n="103" /><anchor id="Pg103" />
any such system. He states the theorem, in effect, as
follows: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Given a simple quadrilateral inscribed in a conic
section, every transversal meets the conic and the four sides
of the quadrilateral in six points which are in involution.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="166. Extension of the theory of poles and polars to
space" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p166" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">166. Extension of the theory of poles and polars to
space.</hi> As an illustration of his remarkable powers of
generalization, we may note that Desargues extended
the notion of poles and polars to space of three dimensions
for the sphere and for certain other surfaces of
the second degree. This is a matter which has not
been touched on in this book, but the notion is not
difficult to grasp. If we draw through any point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> in
space a line to cut a sphere in two points, <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>, and
then construct the fourth harmonic of <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> with respect to
<hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, the locus of this fourth harmonic, for various
lines through <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>, is a plane called the <hi rend="font-style: italic">polar plane</hi> of <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>
with respect to the sphere. With this definition and theorem
one can easily find dual relations between points
and planes in space analogous to those between points and
lines in a plane. Desargues closes his discussion of this
matter with the remark, "Similar properties may be
found for those other solids which are related to the
sphere in the same way that the conic section is to the
circle." It should not be inferred from this remark,
however, that he was acquainted with all the different
varieties of surfaces of the second order. The ancients
were well acquainted with the surfaces obtained by
revolving an ellipse or a parabola about an axis. Even
the hyperboloid of two sheets, obtained by revolving the
hyperbola about its major axis, was known to them,
but probably not the hyperboloid of one sheet, which
<pb n="104" /><anchor id="Pg104" />
results from revolving a hyperbola about the other
axis. All the other solids of the second degree were
probably unknown until their discovery by Euler.<note place="foot"><p>
Euler, Introductio in analysin infinitorum, Appendix, cap. V.
1748.</p></note></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="167. Desargues's method of describing a conic" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p167" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">167.</hi>  Desargues had no conception of the conic section
of the locus of intersection of corresponding rays of two
projective pencils of rays. He seems to have tried to
describe the curve by means of a pair of compasses,
moving one leg back and forth along a straight line
instead of holding it fixed as in drawing a circle. He
does not attempt to define the law of the movement
necessary to obtain a conic by this means.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="168. Reception of Desargues's work" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p168" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">168. Reception of Desargues's work.</hi>  Strange to say,
Desargues's immortal work was heaped with the most violent
abuse and held up to ridicule and scorn! "Incredible
errors! Enormous mistakes and falsities! Really it
is impossible for anyone who is familiar with the science
concerning which he wishes to retail his thoughts, to
keep from laughing!" Such were the comments of reviewers
and critics. Nor were his detractors altogether
ignorant and uninstructed men. In spite of the devotion
of his pupils and in spite of the admiration and friendship
of men like Descartes, Fermat, Mersenne, and
Roberval, his book disappeared so completely that two
centuries after the date of its publication, when the
French geometer Chasles wrote his history of geometry,
there was no means of estimating the value of the work
done by Desargues. Six years later, however, in 1845,
Chasles found a manuscript copy of the "Bruillon-project,"
made by Desargues's pupil, De la Hire.</p>

<pb n="105" /><anchor id="Pg105" /></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="169. Conservatism in Desargues's time" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p169" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">169. Conservatism in Desargues's time.</hi>  It is not necessary
to suppose that this effacement of Desargues's work
for two centuries was due to the savage attacks of his
critics. All this was in accordance with the fashion of
the time, and no man escaped bitter denunciation who
attempted to improve on the methods of the ancients.
Those were days when men refused to believe that a
heavy body falls at the same rate as a lighter one, even
when Galileo made them see it with their own eyes
at the foot of the tower of Pisa. Could they not turn
to the exact page and line of Aristotle which declared
that the heavier body must fall the faster! "I have
read Aristotle's writings from end to end, many times,"
wrote a Jesuit provincial to the mathematician and
astronomer, Christoph Scheiner, at Ingolstadt, whose
telescope seemed to reveal certain mysterious spots on
the sun, "and I can assure you I have nowhere found
anything similar to what you describe. Go, my son, and
tranquilize yourself; be assured that what you take for
spots on the sun are the faults of your glasses, or of
your eyes." The dead hand of Aristotle barred the
advance in every department of research. Physicians
would have nothing to do with Harvey's discoveries
about the circulation of the blood. "Nature is accused
of tolerating a vacuum!" exclaimed a priest when Pascal
began his experiments on the Puy-de-Dome to show
that the column of mercury in a glass tube varied in
height with the pressure of the atmosphere.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="170. Desargues's style of writing" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p170" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">170. Desargues's style of writing.</hi>  Nevertheless, authority
counted for less at this time in Paris than it did in
Italy, and the tragedy enacted in Rome when Galileo
<pb n="106" /><anchor id="Pg106" />
was forced to deny his inmost convictions at the bidding
of a brutal Inquisition could not have been staged
in France. Moreover, in the little company of scientists
of which Desargues was a member the utmost liberty
of thought and expression was maintained. One very
good reason for the disappearance of the work of Desargues
is to be found in his style of writing. He failed
to heed the very good advice given him in a letter from
his warm admirer Descartes.<note place="foot"><p>
Œuvres de Desargues, t. II, 132.</p></note> "You may have two designs,
both very good and very laudable, but which do
not require the same method of procedure: The one is
to write for the learned, and show them some new properties
of the conic sections which they do not already
know; and the other is to write for the curious unlearned,
and to do it so that this matter which until
now has been understood by only a very few, and which
is nevertheless very useful for perspective, for painting,
architecture, etc., shall become common and easy to
all who wish to study them in your book. If you have
the first idea, then it seems to me that it is necessary
to avoid using new terms; for the learned are already
accustomed to using those of Apollonius, and will not
readily change them for others, though better, and thus
yours will serve only to render your demonstrations
more difficult, and to turn away your readers from your
book. If you have the second plan in mind, it is certain
that your terms, which are French, and conceived
with spirit and grace, will be better received by persons
not preoccupied with those of the ancients.... But, if
you have that intention, you should make of it a great
<pb n="107" /><anchor id="Pg107" />
volume; explain it all so fully and so distinctly that
those gentlemen who cannot study without yawning;
who cannot distress their imaginations enough to grasp
a proposition in geometry, nor turn the leaves of a book
to look at the letters in a figure, shall find nothing in
your discourse more difficult to understand than the
description of an enchanted palace in a fairy story."
The point of these remarks is apparent when we note
that Desargues introduced some seventy new terms in
his little book, of which only one, <hi rend="font-style: italic">involution</hi>, has survived.
Curiously enough, this is the one term singled
out for the sharpest criticism and ridicule by his reviewer,
De Beaugrand.<note place="foot"><p>
Œuvres de Desargues, t. II, 370.</p></note> That Descartes knew the character
of Desargues's audience better than he did is also
evidenced by the fact that De Beaugrand exhausted his
patience in reading the first ten pages of the book.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="171. Lack of appreciation of Desargues" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p171" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">171. Lack of appreciation of Desargues.</hi>  Desargues's
methods, entirely different from the analytic methods
just then being developed by Descartes and Fermat,
seem to have been little understood. "Between you
and me," wrote Descartes<note place="foot"><p>
Œuvres de Descartes, t. II, 499.</p></note> to Mersenne, "I can hardly
form an idea of what he may have written concerning
conics." Desargues seems to have boasted that he owed
nothing to any man, and that all his results had come
from his own mind. His favorite pupil, De la Hire, did
not realize the extraordinary simplicity and generality
of his work. It is a remarkable fact that the only one
of all his associates to understand and appreciate the
methods of Desargues should be a lad of sixteen years!</p>

<pb n="108" /><anchor id="Pg108" /></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="172. Pascal and his theorem" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p172" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">172. Pascal and his theorem.</hi>  One does not have to
believe all the marvelous stories of Pascal's admiring
sisters to credit him with wonderful precocity. We have
the fact that in 1640, when he was sixteen years old,
he published a little placard, or poster, entitled "Essay
pour les conique,"<note place="foot"><p>
Œuvres de Pascal, par Brunsehvig et Boutroux, t. I, 252.
</p></note> in which his great theorem appears
for the first time. His manner of putting it may be a
little puzzling to one who has only seen it in the form
given in this book, and it may be worth while for the
student to compare the two methods of stating it. It is
given as follows: <hi rend="font-style: italic">"If in the plane of <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Q</hi> we draw
through <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> the two lines <hi rend="font-style: italic">MK</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">MV</hi>, and through the
point <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi> the two lines <hi rend="font-style: italic">SK</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">SV</hi>, and let <hi rend="font-style: italic">K</hi> be the intersection
of <hi rend="font-style: italic">MK</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">SK</hi>; <hi rend="font-style: italic">V</hi> the intersection of <hi rend="font-style: italic">MV</hi> and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">SV</hi>; <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> the intersection of <hi rend="font-style: italic">MA</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">SA</hi> (<hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> is the intersection
of <hi rend="font-style: italic">SV</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">MK</hi>), and <hi rend="font-style: italic">μ</hi> the intersection of <hi rend="font-style: italic">MV</hi>
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">SK</hi>; and if through two of the four points <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">K</hi>,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">μ</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">V</hi>, which are not in the same straight line with <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>, such as <hi rend="font-style: italic">K</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">V</hi>, we pass the circumference of a circle
cutting the lines <hi rend="font-style: italic">MV</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">MP</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">SV</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">SK</hi> in the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">Q</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">N</hi>; I say that the lines <hi rend="font-style: italic">MS</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">NO</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">PQ</hi> are of the same
order."</hi> (By "lines of the same order" Pascal means
lines which meet in the same point or are parallel.) By
projecting the figure thus described upon another plane
he is able to state his theorem for the case where the
circle is replaced by any conic section.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="173. Pascal's essay" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p173" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">173.</hi>  It must be understood that the "Essay" was
only a résumé of a more extended treatise on conics
which, owing partly to Pascal's extreme youth, partly
to the difficulty of publishing scientific works in those
<pb n="109" /><anchor id="Pg109" />
days, and also to his later morbid interest in religious
matters, was never published. Leibniz<note place="foot"><p>
Chasles, Histoire de la Géométrie, 70.</p></note> examined a copy
of the complete work, and has reported that the great
theorem on the mystic hexagram was made the basis of
the whole theory, and that Pascal had deduced some four
hundred corollaries from it. This would indicate that
here was a man able to take the unconnected materials
of projective geometry and shape them into some such
symmetrical edifice as we have to-day. Unfortunately
for science, Pascal's early death prevented the further
development of the subject at his hands.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="174. Pascal's originality" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p174" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">174.</hi>  In the "Essay" Pascal gives full credit to
Desargues, saying of one of the other propositions,
"We prove this property also, the original discoverer of
which is M. Desargues, of Lyons, one of the greatest
minds of this age ... and I wish to acknowledge that
I owe to him the little which I have discovered." This
acknowledgment led Descartes to believe that Pascal's
theorem should also be credited to Desargues. But in
the scientific club which the young Pascal attended
in company with his father, who was also a scientist
of some reputation, the theorem went by the name of
'la Pascalia,' and Descartes's remarks do not seem to
have been taken seriously, which indeed is not to be
wondered at, seeing that he was in the habit of giving
scant credit to the work of other scientific investigators
than himself.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="175. De la Hire and his work" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p175" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">175. De la Hire and his work.</hi>  De la Hire added
little to the development of the subject, but he did put
into print much of what Desargues had already worked
<pb n="110" /><anchor id="Pg110" />
out, not fully realizing, perhaps, how much was his
own and how much he owed to his teacher. Writing in
1679, he says,<note place="foot"><p>
Œuvres de Desargues, t. I, 231.</p></note> "I have just read for the first time
M. Desargues's little treatise, and have made a copy
of it in order to have a more perfect knowledge of it."
It was this copy that saved the work of his master
from oblivion. De la Hire should be credited, among
other things, with the invention of a method by which
figures in the plane may be transformed into others
of the same order. His method is extremely interesting,
and will serve as an exercise for the student in
synthetic projective geometry. It is as follows: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Draw
two parallel lines, <hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>, and select a point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi> in their
plane. Through any point <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> of the plane draw a line
meeting <hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>. Draw a line through <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>
parallel to <hi rend="font-style: italic">AP</hi>, and let it meet <hi rend="font-style: italic">MP</hi> in the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">M'</hi>. It
may be shown that the point <hi rend="font-style: italic">M'</hi> thus obtained does not
depend at all on the particular ray <hi rend="font-style: italic">MAB</hi> used in determining
it, so that we have set up a one-to-one correspondence
between the points <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">M'</hi> in the plane.</hi> The student
may show that as <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> describes a point-row, <hi rend="font-style: italic">M'</hi> describes
a point-row projective to it. As <hi rend="font-style: italic">M</hi> describes a conic,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">M'</hi> describes another conic. This sort of correspondence
is called a <hi rend="font-style: italic">collineation</hi>. It will be found that the
points on the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi> transform into themselves, as does
also the single point <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>. Points on the line <hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi> transform
into points on the line at infinity. The student
should remove the metrical features of the construction
and take, instead of two parallel lines <hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>, any
two lines which may meet in a finite part of the plane.
<pb n="111" /><anchor id="Pg111" />
The collineation is a special one in that the general
one has an invariant triangle instead of an invariant
point and line.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="176. Descartes and his influence" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p176" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">176. Descartes and his influence.</hi>  The history of synthetic
projective geometry has little to do with the work
of the great philosopher Descartes, except in an indirect
way. The method of algebraic analysis invented by
him, and the differential and integral calculus which
developed from it, attracted all the interest of the
mathematical world for nearly two centuries after
Desargues, and synthetic geometry received scant attention
during the rest of the seventeenth century and for
the greater part of the eighteenth century. It is difficult
for moderns to conceive of the richness and variety of
the problems which confronted the first workers in the
calculus. To come into the possession of a method
which would solve almost automatically problems which
had baffled the keenest minds of antiquity; to be able
to derive in a few moments results which an Archimedes
had toiled long and patiently to reach or a Galileo had
determined experimentally; such was the happy experience
of mathematicians for a century and a half after
Descartes, and it is not to be wondered at that along
with this enthusiastic pursuit of new theorems in analysis
should come a species of contempt for the methods
of the ancients, so that in his preface to his "Méchanique
Analytique," published in 1788, Lagrange boasts, "One
will find no figures in this work." But at the close of
the eighteenth century the field opened up to research
by the invention of the calculus began to appear so
thoroughly explored that new methods and new objects
<pb n="112" /><anchor id="Pg112" />
of investigation began to attract attention. Lagrange
himself, in his later years, turned in weariness from
analysis and mechanics, and applied himself to chemistry,
physics, and philosophical speculations. "This state of
mind," says Darboux,<note place="foot"><p>
See Ball, History of Mathematics, French edition, t. II, 233.
</p></note> "we find almost always at certain
moments in the lives of the greatest scholars." At any
rate, after lying fallow for almost two centuries, the
field of pure geometry was attacked with almost religious
enthusiasm.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="177. Newton and Maclaurin" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p177" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">177. Newton and Maclaurin.</hi>  But in hastening on
to the epoch of Poncelet and Steiner we should not
omit to mention the work of Newton and Maclaurin.
Although their results were obtained by analysis for the
most part, nevertheless they have given us theorems
which fall naturally into the domain of synthetic projective
geometry. Thus Newton's "organic method"<note place="foot"><p>
Newton, Principia, lib. i, lemma XXI.</p></note>
of generating conic sections is closely related to the
method which we have made use of in Chapter III.
It is as follows: <hi rend="font-style: italic">If two angles, <hi rend="font-style: italic">AOS</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">AO'S</hi>, of given
magnitudes turn about their respective vertices, <hi rend="font-style: italic">O</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">O'</hi>,
in such a way that the point of intersection, <hi rend="font-style: italic">S</hi>, of one pair
of arms always lies on a straight line, the point of intersection,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, of the other pair of arms will describe a conic.</hi>
The proof of this is left to the student.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="178. Maclaurin's construction" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p178" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">178.</hi>  Another method of generating a conic is due to
Maclaurin.<note place="foot"><p>
Maclaurin, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London, 1735.</p></note> The construction, which we also leave for
the student to justify, is as follows: <hi rend="font-style: italic">If a triangle <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'PQ</hi>
move in such a way that its sides, <hi rend="font-style: italic">PQ</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">QC'</hi>, and <hi rend="font-style: italic">C'P</hi>, turn
<pb n="113" /><anchor id="Pg113" />
around three fixed points, <hi rend="font-style: italic">R</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">A</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">B</hi>, respectively, while two of
its vertices, <hi rend="font-style: italic">P</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Q</hi>, slide along two fixed lines, <hi rend="font-style: italic">CB'</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">CA'</hi>,
respectively, then the remaining vertex will describe a conic.</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="179. Descriptive geometry and the second revival" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p179" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">179. Descriptive geometry and the second revival.</hi>
The second revival of pure geometry was again to take
place at a time of great intellectual activity. The period
at the close of the eighteenth and the beginning of
the nineteenth century is adorned with a glorious list
of mighty names, among which are Gauss, Lagrange,
Legendre, Laplace, Monge, Carnot, Poncelet, Cauchy,
Fourier, Steiner, Von Staudt, Möbius, Abel, and many
others. The renaissance may be said to date from the invention
by Monge<note place="foot"><p>
Monge, Géométrie Descriptive. 1800.</p></note> of the theory of <hi rend="font-style: italic">descriptive geometry</hi>.
Descriptive geometry is concerned with the representation
of figures in space of three dimensions by means
of space of two dimensions. The method commonly
used consists in projecting the space figure on two
planes (a vertical and a horizontal plane being most
convenient), the projections being made most simply
for metrical purposes from infinity in directions perpendicular
to the two planes of projection. These two
planes are then made to coincide by revolving the horizontal
into the vertical about their common line. Such
is the method of descriptive geometry which in the
hands of Monge acquired wonderful generality and elegance.
Problems concerning fortifications were worked
so quickly by this method that the commandant at the
military school at Mézières, where Monge was a draftsman
and pupil, viewed the results with distrust. Monge
afterward became professor of mathematics at Mézières
<pb n="114" /><anchor id="Pg114" />
and gathered around him a group of students destined
to have a share in the advancement of pure geometry.
Among these were Hachette, Brianchon, Dupin, Chasles,
Poncelet, and many others.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="180. Duality, homology, continuity, contingent relations" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p180" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">180. Duality, homology, continuity, contingent relations.</hi>
Analytic geometry had left little to do in the
way of discovery of new material, and the mathematical
world was ready for the construction of the edifice.
The activities of the group of men that followed Monge
were directed toward this end, and we now begin to
hear of the great unifying notions of duality, homology,
continuity, contingent relations, and the like. The
devotees of pure geometry were beginning to feel the
need of a basis for their science which should be at
once as general and as rigorous as that of the analysts.
Their dream was the building up of a system of geometry
which should be independent of analysis. Monge,
and after him Poncelet, spent much thought on the so-called
"principle of continuity," afterwards discussed
by Chasles under the name of the "principle of contingent
relations." To get a clear idea of this principle,
consider a theorem in geometry in the proof of which
certain auxiliary elements are employed. These elements
do not appear in the statement of the theorem,
and the theorem might possibly be proved without them.
In drawing the figure for the proof of the theorem,
however, some of these elements may not appear, or,
as the analyst would say, they become imaginary. "No
matter," says the principle of contingent relations, "the
theorem is true, and the proof is valid whether the
elements used in the proof are real or imaginary."</p>

<pb n="115" /><anchor id="Pg115" /></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="181. Poncelet and Cauchy" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p181" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">181. Poncelet and Cauchy.</hi>  The efforts of Poncelet
to compel the acceptance of this principle independent
of analysis resulted in a bitter and perhaps fruitless
controversy between him and the great analyst Cauchy.
In his review of Poncelet's great work on the projective
properties of figures<note place="foot"><p>
Poncelet, Traité des Propriétés Projectives des Figures. 1822.
(See p. 357, Vol. II, of the edition of 1866.)</p></note>
Cauchy says, "In his preliminary
discourse the author insists once more on the
necessity of admitting into geometry what he calls the
'principle of continuity.' We have already discussed
that principle ... and we have found that that principle
is, properly speaking, only a strong induction,
which cannot be indiscriminately applied to all sorts of
questions in geometry, nor even in analysis. The reasons
which we have given as the basis of our opinion
are not affected by the considerations which the author
has developed in his Traité des Propriétés Projectives
des Figures." Although this principle is constantly made
use of at the present day in all sorts of investigations,
careful geometricians are in agreement with Cauchy
in this matter, and use it only as a convenient working
tool for purposes of exploration. The one-to-one
correspondence between geometric forms and algebraic
analysis is subject to many and important exceptions.
The field of analysis is much more general than the
field of geometry, and while there may be a clear
notion in analysis to, correspond to every notion in
geometry, the opposite is not true. Thus, in analysis
we can deal with four coördinates as well as with
three, but the existence of a space of four dimensions
<pb n="116" /><anchor id="Pg116" />
to correspond to it does not therefore follow. When
the geometer speaks of the two real or imaginary intersections
of a straight line with a conic, he is really
speaking the language of algebra. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Apart from the
algebra involved</hi>, it is the height of absurdity to try to
distinguish between the two points in which a line
<hi rend="font-style: italic">fails to meet a conic!</hi></p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="182. The work of Poncelet" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p182" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">182. The work of Poncelet.</hi>  But Poncelet's right to
the title "The Father of Modern Geometry" does not
stand or fall with the principle of contingent relations.
In spite of the fact that he considered this principle
the most important of all his discoveries, his reputation
rests on more solid foundations. He was the first to
study figures <hi rend="font-style: italic">in homology</hi>, which is, in effect, the collineation
described in § 175, where corresponding points
lie on straight lines through a fixed point. He was the
first to give, by means of the theory of poles and polars,
a transformation by which an element is transformed
into another of a different sort. Point-to-point transformations
will sometimes generalize a theorem, but
the transformation discovered by Poncelet may throw a
theorem into one of an entirely different aspect. The
principle of duality, first stated in definite form by
Gergonne,<note place="foot"><p>
Gergonne, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Annales de Mathématiques, XVI, 209. 1826.</hi></p></note>
the editor of the mathematical journal in
which Poncelet published his researches, was based by
Poncelet on his theory of poles and polars. He also put
into definite form the notions of the infinitely distant
elements in space as all lying on a plane at infinity.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="183. The debt which analytic geometry owes to synthetic
geometry" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p183" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">183. The debt which analytic geometry owes to synthetic
geometry.</hi> The reaction of pure geometry on
<pb n="117" /><anchor id="Pg117" />
analytic geometry is clearly seen in the development of
the notion of the <hi rend="font-style: italic">class</hi>  of a curve, which is the number
of tangents that may be drawn from a point in a plane
to a given curve lying in that plane. If a point moves
along a conic, it is easy to show&mdash;and the student
is recommended to furnish the proof&mdash;that the polar
line with respect to a conic remains tangent to another
conic. This may be expressed by the statement that the
conic is of the second order and also of the second class.
It might be thought that if a point moved along a
cubic curve, its polar line with respect to a conic would
remain tangent to another cubic curve. This is not the
case, however, and the investigations of Poncelet and
others to determine the class of a given curve were
afterward completed by Plücker. The notion of geometrical
transformation led also to the very important
developments in the theory of invariants, which, geometrically,
are the elements and configurations which
are not affected by the transformation. The anharmonic
ratio of four points is such an invariant, since it remains
unaltered under all projective transformations.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="184. Steiner and his work" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p184" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">184. Steiner and his work.</hi>  In the work of Poncelet
and his contemporaries, Chasles, Brianchon, Hachette,
Dupin, Gergonne, and others, the anharmonic ratio enjoyed
a fundamental rôle. It is made also the basis of
the great work of Steiner,<note place="foot"><p>
Steiner, Systematische Ehtwickelung der Abhängigkeit geometrischer
Gestalten von einander. 1832.</p></note>
who was the first to treat
of the conic, not as the projection of a circle, but as the
locus of intersection of corresponding rays of two projective
pencils. Steiner not only related to each other,
<pb n="118" /><anchor id="Pg118" />
in one-to-one correspondence, point-rows and pencils
and all the other fundamental forms, but he set into
correspondence even curves and surfaces of higher degrees.
This new and fertile conception gave him an
easy and direct route into the most abstract and difficult
regions of pure geometry. Much of his work was
given without any indication of the methods by which
he had arrived at it, and many of his results have only
recently been verified.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="185. Von Staudt and his work" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p185" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">185. Von Staudt and his work.</hi>  To complete the theory
of geometry as we have it to-day it only remained
to free it from its dependence on the semimetrical basis
of the anharmonic ratio. This work was accomplished by
Von Staudt,<note place="foot"><p>
Von Staudt, Geometrie der Lage. 1847.</p></note>
who applied himself to the restatement
of the theory of geometry in a form independent of
analytic and metrical notions. The method which has
been used in Chapter II to develop the notion of four
harmonic points by means of the complete quadrilateral
is due to Von Staudt. His work is characterized by a
most remarkable generality, in that he is able to discuss
real and imaginary forms with equal ease. Thus he
assumes a one-to-one correspondence between the points
and lines of a plane, and defines a conic as the locus
of points which lie on their corresponding lines, and a
pencil of rays of the second order as the system of lines
which pass through their corresponding points. The
point-row and pencil of the second order may be real
or imaginary, but his theorems still apply. An illustration
of a correspondence of this sort, where the conic
is imaginary, is given in § 15 of the first chapter. In
<pb n="119" /><anchor id="Pg119" />
defining conjugate imaginary points on a line, Von
Staudt made use of an involution of points having no
double points. His methods, while elegant and powerful,
are hardly adapted to an elementary course, but
Reye<note place="foot"><p>
Reye, Geometrie der Lage. Translated by Holgate, 1897.</p></note>
and others have done much toward simplifying
his presentation.</p></div>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="186. Recent developments" /><index index="pdf" />
<head></head><p><anchor id="p186" /><hi rend="font-weight: bold">186. Recent developments.</hi>  It would be only confusing
to the student to attempt to trace here the later
developments of the science of protective geometry. It
is concerned for the most part with curves and surfaces
of a higher degree than the second. Purely synthetic
methods have been used with marked success in the
study of the straight line in space. The struggle between
analysis and pure geometry has long since come
to an end. Each has its distinct advantages, and the
mathematician who cultivates one at the expense of the
other will never attain the results that he would attain
if both methods were equally ready to his hand. Pure
geometry has to its credit some of the finest discoveries
in mathematics, and need not apologize for having
been born. The day of its usefulness has not passed
with the invention of abridged notation and of short
methods in analysis. While we may be certain that any
geometrical problem may always be stated in analytic
form, it does not follow that that statement will be
simple or easily interpreted. For many mathematicians
the geometric intuitions are weak, and for such the
method will have little attraction. On the other hand,
there will always be those for whom the subject will
have a peculiar glamor&mdash;who will follow with delight
<pb n="120" /><anchor id="Pg120" />
the curious and unexpected relations between the forms
of space. There is a corresponding pleasure, doubtless,
for the analyst in tracing the marvelous connections
between the various fields in which he wanders, and it
is as absurd to shut one's eyes to the beauties in one
as it is to ignore those in the other. "Let us cultivate
geometry, then," says Darboux,<note place="foot"><p>
Ball, loc. cit. p. 261.</p></note>
"without wishing in
all points to equal it to its rival. Besides, if we were
tempted to neglect it, it would not be long in finding
in the applications of mathematics, as once it has already
done, the means of renewing its life and of
developing itself anew. It is like the Giant Antaeus,
who renewed, his strength by touching the earth."</p>
</div>
</div>


<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<head>INDEX</head>

<p rend="text-align: center">(The numbers refer to the paragraphs)</p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Abel (1802-1829), <ref target="p179">179</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Analogy, <ref target="p24">24</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Analytic geometry, <ref target="p21">21</ref>, <ref target="p118">118</ref>, <ref target="p119">119</ref>,
120, <ref target="p146">146</ref>, <ref target="p176">176</ref>, <ref target="p180">180</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Anharmonic ratio, <ref target="p46">46</ref>, <ref target="p161">161</ref>, <ref target="p184">184</ref>, <ref target="p185">185</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Apollonius (second half of third
century B.C.), <ref target="p70">70</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Archimedes (287-212 B.C.), <ref target="p176">176</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Aristotle (384-322 B.C.), <ref target="p169">169</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Asymptotes, <ref target="p111">111</ref>, <ref target="p113">113</ref>, <ref target="p114">114</ref>, <ref target="p115">115</ref>,
116, <ref target="p117">117</ref>, <ref target="p118">118</ref>, <ref target="p148">148</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Axes of a conic, <ref target="p148">148</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Axial pencil, <ref target="p7">7</ref>, <ref target="p8">8</ref>, <ref target="p23">23</ref>, <ref target="p50">50</ref>, <ref target="p54">54</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Axis of perspectivity, <ref target="p8">8</ref>, <ref target="p47">47</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Bacon (1561-1626), <ref target="p162">162</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Bisection, <ref target="p41">41</ref>, <ref target="p109">109</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Brianchon (1785-1864), <ref target="p84">84</ref>, <ref target="p85">85</ref>, <ref target="p86">86</ref>,
88, <ref target="p89">89</ref>, <ref target="p90">90</ref>, <ref target="p95">95</ref>, <ref target="p105">105</ref>, <ref target="p113">113</ref>, <ref target="p174">174</ref>, <ref target="p184">184</ref> <lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Calculus, <ref target="p176">176</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Carnot (1796-1832), <ref target="p179">179</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Cauchy (1789-1857), <ref target="p179">179</ref>, <ref target="p181">181</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Cavalieri (1598-1647), <ref target="p162">162</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Center of a conic, <ref target="p107">107</ref>, <ref target="p112">112</ref>, <ref target="p148">148</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Center of involution, <ref target="p141">141</ref>, <ref target="p142">142</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Center of perspectivity, <ref target="p8">8</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Central conic, <ref target="p120">120</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Chasles (1793-1880), <ref target="p168">168</ref>, <ref target="p179">179</ref>, <ref target="p180">180</ref>,
184<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Circle, <ref target="p21">21</ref>, <ref target="p73">73</ref>, <ref target="p80">80</ref>, <ref target="p145">145</ref>, <ref target="p146">146</ref>, <ref target="p147">147</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Circular involution, <ref target="p147">147</ref>, <ref target="p149">149</ref>, <ref target="p150">150</ref>,
151<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Circular points, <ref target="p146">146</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Class of a curve, <ref target="p183">183</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Classification of conics, <ref target="p110">110</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Collineation, <ref target="p175">175</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Concentric pencils, <ref target="p50">50</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Cone of the second order, <ref target="p59">59</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Conic, <ref target="p73">73</ref>, <ref target="p81">81</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Conjugate diameters, <ref target="p114">114</ref>, <ref target="p148">148</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Conjugate normal, <ref target="p151">151</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Conjugate points and lines, <ref target="p100">100</ref>,
109, <ref target="p138">138</ref>, <ref target="p139">139</ref>, <ref target="p140">140</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Constants in an equation, <ref target="p21">21</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Contingent relations, <ref target="p180">180</ref>, <ref target="p181">181</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Continuity, <ref target="p180">180</ref>, <ref target="p181">181</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Continuous correspondence, <ref target="p9">9</ref>, <ref target="p10">10</ref>,
21, <ref target="p49">49</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Corresponding elements, <ref target="p64">64</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Counting, <ref target="p1">1</ref>, <ref target="p4">4</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Cross ratio, <ref target="p46">46</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Darboux, <ref target="p176">176</ref>, <ref target="p186">186</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">De Beaugrand, <ref target="p170">170</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Degenerate pencil of rays of the
second order, <ref target="p58">58</ref>, <ref target="p93">93</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Degenerate point-row of the
second order, <ref target="p56">56</ref>, <ref target="p78">78</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">De la Hire (1640-1718), <ref target="p168">168</ref>, <ref target="p171">171</ref>,
175<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Desargues (1593-1662), <ref target="p25">25</ref>, <ref target="p26">26</ref>, <ref target="p40">40</ref>,
121, <ref target="p125">125</ref>, <ref target="p162">162</ref>, <ref target="p163">163</ref>, <ref target="p164">164</ref>, <ref target="p165">165</ref>, <ref target="p166">166</ref>,
167, <ref target="p168">168</ref>, <ref target="p169">169</ref>, <ref target="p170">170</ref>, <ref target="p171">171</ref>, <ref target="p174">174</ref>, <ref target="p175">175</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Descartes (1596-1650), <ref target="p162">162</ref>, <ref target="p170">170</ref>,
171, <ref target="p174">174</ref>, <ref target="p176">176</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Descriptive geometry, <ref target="p179">179</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Diameter, <ref target="p107">107</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Directrix, <ref target="p157">157</ref>, <ref target="p158">158</ref>, <ref target="p159">159</ref>, <ref target="p160">160</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Double correspondence, <ref target="p128">128</ref>, <ref target="p130">130</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Double points of an involution, <ref target="p124">124</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Double rays of an involution, <ref target="p133">133</ref>,
134<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Duality, <ref target="p94">94</ref>, <ref target="p104">104</ref>, <ref target="p161">161</ref>, <ref target="p180">180</ref>, <ref target="p182">182</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Dupin (1784-1873), <ref target="p174">174</ref>, <ref target="p184">184</ref> <lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Eccentricity of conic, <ref target="p159">159</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Ellipse, <ref target="p110">110</ref>, <ref target="p111">111</ref>, <ref target="p162">162</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Equation of conic, <ref target="p118">118</ref>, <ref target="p119">119</ref>, <ref target="p120">120</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Euclid (ca. 300 B.C.), <ref target="p6">6</ref>, <ref target="p22">22</ref>, <ref target="p104">104</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Euler (1707-1783), <ref target="p166">166</ref> <lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Fermat (1601-1665), <ref target="p162">162</ref>, <ref target="p171">171</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Foci of a conic, <ref target="p152">152</ref>, <ref target="p153">153</ref>, <ref target="p154">154</ref>, <ref target="p155">155</ref>,
156, <ref target="p157">157</ref>, <ref target="p158">158</ref>, <ref target="p159">159</ref>, <ref target="p160">160</ref>, <ref target="p161">161</ref>, <ref target="p162">162</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Fourier (1768-1830), <ref target="p179">179</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Fourth harmonic, <ref target="p29">29</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Fundamental form, <ref target="p7">7</ref>, <ref target="p16">16</ref>, <ref target="p23">23</ref>, <ref target="p36">36</ref>,
47, <ref target="p60">60</ref>, <ref target="p184">184</ref> <lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Galileo (1564-1642), <ref target="p162">162</ref>, <ref target="p169">169</ref>, <ref target="p170">170</ref>,
176<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Gauss (1777-1855), <ref target="p179">179</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Gergonne (1771-1859), <ref target="p182">182</ref>, <ref target="p184">184</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Greek geometry, <ref target="p161">161</ref> <lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Hachette (1769-1834), <ref target="p179">179</ref>, <ref target="p184">184</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Harmonic conjugates, <ref target="p29">29</ref>, <ref target="p30">30</ref>, <ref target="p39">39</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Harmonic elements, <ref target="p86">86</ref>, <ref target="p49">49</ref>, <ref target="p91">91</ref>,
163, <ref target="p185">185</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Harmonic lines, <ref target="p33">33</ref>, <ref target="p34">34</ref>, <ref target="p35">35</ref>, <ref target="p66">66</ref>, <ref target="p67">67</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Harmonic planes, <ref target="p34">34</ref>, <ref target="p35">35</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Harmonic points, <ref target="p29">29</ref>, <ref target="p31">31</ref>, <ref target="p32">32</ref>, <ref target="p33">33</ref>,
34, <ref target="p35">35</ref>, <ref target="p36">36</ref>, <ref target="p43">43</ref>, <ref target="p71">71</ref>, <ref target="p161">161</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Harmonic tangents to a conic,
91, <ref target="p92">92</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Harvey (1578-1657), <ref target="p169">169</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Homology, <ref target="p180">180</ref>, <ref target="p182">182</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Huygens (1629-1695), <ref target="p162">162</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Hyperbola, <ref target="p110">110</ref>, <ref target="p111">111</ref>, <ref target="p113">113</ref>, <ref target="p114">114</ref>, <ref target="p115">115</ref>,
116, <ref target="p117">117</ref>, <ref target="p118">118</ref>, <ref target="p162">162</ref> <lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Imaginary elements, <ref target="p146">146</ref>, <ref target="p180">180</ref>, <ref target="p181">181</ref>,
182, <ref target="p185">185</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Infinitely distant elements, <ref target="p6">6</ref>, <ref target="p9">9</ref>,
22, <ref target="p39">39</ref>, <ref target="p40">40</ref>, <ref target="p41">41</ref>, <ref target="p104">104</ref>, <ref target="p107">107</ref>, <ref target="p110">110</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Infinity, <ref target="p4">4</ref>, <ref target="p5">5</ref>, <ref target="p10">10</ref>, <ref target="p12">12</ref>, <ref target="p13">13</ref>, <ref target="p14">14</ref>, <ref target="p15">15</ref>,
17, <ref target="p18">18</ref>, <ref target="p19">19</ref>, <ref target="p20">20</ref>, <ref target="p21">21</ref>, <ref target="p22">22</ref>, <ref target="p41">41</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Involution, <ref target="p37">37</ref>, <ref target="p123">123</ref>, <ref target="p124">124</ref>, <ref target="p125">125</ref>, <ref target="p126">126</ref>,
127, <ref target="p128">128</ref>, <ref target="p129">129</ref>, <ref target="p130">130</ref>, <ref target="p131">131</ref>, <ref target="p132">132</ref>, <ref target="p133">133</ref>,
134, <ref target="p135">135</ref>, <ref target="p136">136</ref>, <ref target="p137">137</ref>, <ref target="p138">138</ref>, <ref target="p139">139</ref>, <ref target="p140">140</ref>,
161, <ref target="p163">163</ref>, <ref target="p170">170</ref> <lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Kepler (1571-1630), <ref target="p162">162</ref> <lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Lagrange (1736-1813), <ref target="p176">176</ref>, <ref target="p179">179</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Laplace (1749-1827), <ref target="p179">179</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Legendre (1752-1833), <ref target="p179">179</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Leibniz (1646-1716), <ref target="p173">173</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Linear construction, <ref target="p40">40</ref>, <ref target="p41">41</ref>, <ref target="p42">42</ref> <lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Maclaurin (1698-1746), <ref target="p177">177</ref>, <ref target="p178">178</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Measurements, <ref target="p23">23</ref>, <ref target="p40">40</ref>, <ref target="p41">41</ref>, <ref target="p104">104</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Mersenne (1588-1648), <ref target="p168">168</ref>, <ref target="p171">171</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Metrical theorems, <ref target="p40">40</ref>, <ref target="p104">104</ref>, <ref target="p106">106</ref>,
107, <ref target="p141">141</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Middle point, <ref target="p39">39</ref>, <ref target="p41">41</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Möbius (1790-1868), <ref target="p179">179</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Monge (1746-1818), <ref target="p179">179</ref>, <ref target="p180">180</ref> <lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Napier (1550-1617), <ref target="p162">162</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Newton (1642-1727), <ref target="p177">177</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Numbers, <ref target="p4">4</ref>, <ref target="p21">21</ref>, <ref target="p43">43</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Numerical computations, <ref target="p43">43</ref>, <ref target="p44">44</ref>,
46 <lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">One-to-one correspondence, <ref target="p1">1</ref>, <ref target="p2">2</ref>,
3, <ref target="p4">4</ref>, <ref target="p5">5</ref>, <ref target="p6">6</ref>, <ref target="p7">7</ref>, <ref target="p9">9</ref>, <ref target="p10">10</ref>, <ref target="p11">11</ref>, <ref target="p24">24</ref>, <ref target="p36">36</ref>,
87, <ref target="p43">43</ref>, <ref target="p60">60</ref>, <ref target="p104">104</ref>, <ref target="p106">106</ref>, <ref target="p184">184</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Opposite sides of a hexagon, <ref target="p70">70</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Opposite sides of a quadrilateral,
28, <ref target="p29">29</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Order of a form, <ref target="p7">7</ref>, <ref target="p10">10</ref>, <ref target="p11">11</ref>, <ref target="p12">12</ref>, <ref target="p13">13</ref>,
14, <ref target="p15">15</ref>, <ref target="p16">16</ref>, <ref target="p17">17</ref>, <ref target="p18">18</ref>, <ref target="p19">19</ref>, <ref target="p20">20</ref>, <ref target="p21">21</ref> <lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pappus (fourth century A.D.),
161<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Parabola, <ref target="p110">110</ref>, <ref target="p111">111</ref>, <ref target="p112">112</ref>, <ref target="p119">119</ref>, <ref target="p162">162</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Parallel lines, <ref target="p39">39</ref>, <ref target="p41">41</ref>, <ref target="p162">162</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pascal (1623-1662), <ref target="p69">69</ref>, <ref target="p70">70</ref>, <ref target="p74">74</ref>, <ref target="p75">75</ref>,
76, <ref target="p77">77</ref>, <ref target="p78">78</ref>, <ref target="p95">95</ref>, <ref target="p105">105</ref>, <ref target="p125">125</ref>, <ref target="p162">162</ref>,
169, <ref target="p171">171</ref>, <ref target="p172">172</ref>, <ref target="p173">173</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pencil of planes of the second
order, <ref target="p59">59</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pencil of rays, <ref target="p6">6</ref>, <ref target="p7">7</ref>, <ref target="p8">8</ref>, <ref target="p23">23</ref>;
  of the second order, <ref target="p57">57</ref>, <ref target="p60">60</ref>, <ref target="p79">79</ref>, <ref target="p81">81</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Perspective position, <ref target="p6">6</ref>, <ref target="p8">8</ref>, <ref target="p35">35</ref>, <ref target="p37">37</ref>,
51, <ref target="p53">53</ref>, <ref target="p71">71</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Plane system, <ref target="p16">16</ref>, <ref target="p23">23</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Planes on space, <ref target="p17">17</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Point of contact, <ref target="p87">87</ref>, <ref target="p88">88</ref>, <ref target="p89">89</ref>, <ref target="p90">90</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Point system, <ref target="p16">16</ref>, <ref target="p23">23</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Point-row, <ref target="p6">6</ref>, <ref target="p7">7</ref>, <ref target="p8">8</ref>, <ref target="p9">9</ref>, <ref target="p23">23</ref>;
  of the second order, <ref target="p55">55</ref>, <ref target="p60">60</ref>, <ref target="p61">61</ref>, <ref target="p66">66</ref>,
    <ref target="p67">67</ref>, <ref target="p72">72</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Points in space, <ref target="p18">18</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Pole and polar, <ref target="p98">98</ref>, <ref target="p99">99</ref>, <ref target="p100">100</ref>, <ref target="p101">101</ref>,
138, <ref target="p164">164</ref>, <ref target="p166">166</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Poncelet (1788-1867), <ref target="p177">177</ref>, <ref target="p179">179</ref>,
180, <ref target="p181">181</ref>, <ref target="p182">182</ref>, <ref target="p183">183</ref>, <ref target="p184">184</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Principal axis of a conic, <ref target="p157">157</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Projection, <ref target="p161">161</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Protective axial pencils, <ref target="p59">59</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Projective correspondence, <ref target="p9">9</ref>, <ref target="p35">35</ref>,
36, <ref target="p37">37</ref>, <ref target="p47">47</ref>, <ref target="p71">71</ref>, <ref target="p92">92</ref>, <ref target="p104">104</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Projective pencils, <ref target="p53">53</ref>, <ref target="p64">64</ref>, <ref target="p68">68</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Projective point-rows, <ref target="p51">51</ref>, <ref target="p79">79</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Projective properties, <ref target="p24">24</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Projective theorems, <ref target="p40">40</ref>, <ref target="p104">104</ref> <lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Quadrangle, <ref target="p26">26</ref>, <ref target="p27">27</ref>, <ref target="p28">28</ref>, <ref target="p29">29</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Quadric cone, <ref target="p59">59</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Quadrilateral, <ref target="p88">88</ref>, <ref target="p95">95</ref>, <ref target="p96">96</ref> <lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Roberval (1602-1675), <ref target="p168">168</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Ruler construction, <ref target="p40">40</ref> <lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Scheiner, <ref target="p169">169</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Self-corresponding elements, <ref target="p47">47</ref>,
48, <ref target="p49">49</ref>, <ref target="p50">50</ref>, <ref target="p51">51</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Self-dual, <ref target="p105">105</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Self-polar triangle, <ref target="p102">102</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Separation of elements in involution,
148<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Separation of harmonic conjugates,
38<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Sequence of points, <ref target="p49">49</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Sign of segment, <ref target="p44">44</ref>, <ref target="p45">45</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Similarity, <ref target="p106">106</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Skew lines, <ref target="p12">12</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Space system, <ref target="p19">19</ref>, <ref target="p23">23</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Sphere, <ref target="p21">21</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Steiner (1796-1863), <ref target="p129">129</ref>, <ref target="p130">130</ref>, <ref target="p131">131</ref>,
177, <ref target="p179">179</ref>, <ref target="p184">184</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Steiner's construction, <ref target="p129">129</ref>, <ref target="p130">130</ref>,
131<lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Superposed point-rows, <ref target="p47">47</ref>, <ref target="p48">48</ref>, <ref target="p49">49</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Surfaces of the second degree, <ref target="p166">166</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">System of lines in space, <ref target="p20">20</ref>, <ref target="p23">23</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Systems of conics, <ref target="p125">125</ref> <lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Tangent line, <ref target="p61">61</ref>, <ref target="p80">80</ref>, <ref target="p81">81</ref>, <ref target="p87">87</ref>, <ref target="p88">88</ref>,
89, <ref target="p90">90</ref>, <ref target="p91">91</ref>, <ref target="p92">92</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Tycho Brahe (1546-1601), <ref target="p162">162</ref> <lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Verner, <ref target="p161">161</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Vertex of conic, <ref target="p157">157</ref>, <ref target="p159">159</ref><lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Von Staudt (1798-1867), <ref target="p179">179</ref>, <ref target="p185">185</ref> <lb /></p>

<p rend="text-indent: 0">Wallis (1616-1703), <ref target="p162">162</ref><lb /></p>

</div>

</body>

<back rend="page-break-before: right">
<div>
<pgIf output="pdf">
  <then>
      <div>
        <divGen type="pgfooter" rend="page-break-before: right" />
      </div>
  </then>
  <else>
      <div>
        <head>Footnotes</head>
        <divGen type="footnotes" />
      </div>

      <div>
        <divGen type="pgfooter" rend="page-break-before: right" />
      </div>
  </else>
</pgIf>
</div>
</back>

    </text>
</TEI.2>

<!--
A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 17001-0.txt or 17001-0.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/7/0/0/17001/


Updated editions will replace the previous one — the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
— you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.


THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you
share it without charge with others.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg”
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation.”

    - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

    - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

    - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES — Except for the “Right of
Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND — If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ’AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY — You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook’s eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
-->
